Penetrating Sacral Injury with a Wooden Foreign Body
Spinal penetrating trauma has a complex neurosurgical management. This study presents a 55-year-old male admitted in our center with a 1?℅?1 centimeter laceration on the sacral area skin due to a wooden penetrating object. The computed tomography (CT) of the spine revealed a penetrating object that was introduced from the posterior aspect of the sacrum into dural space and then stopped in the S1 vertebral body. We performed a laminectomy of intact superior portion of the S1 lamina and released the wood from the surrounding bone, and finally, we pulled it out.
Spinal penetrating trauma has a complex neurosurgical management. The complications such as meningitis, osteomyelitis, wound infection, and neurological deficits increase the complexity of treating these patients [1]. Also, their surgical management is accompanied with some possible complications such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. A true diagnosis and fine management can improve the overall outcome of these patients. After searching databases all over the world, we could not find any report of penetrating wood in the sacral area.
This study presents a 55-year-old male admitted in our center with a 1?℅?1 centimeter laceration on the sacral area skin, 12?cm above the anus. He had fallen from a mulberry tree and had removed the sunken tree branch. He presented no neurological deficit or fever and had a normal sphincter function. The laceration was dirty with slow CSF leakage. The pelvic X-ray showed an area of defect in the sacral region (Figure 1(a)). The computed tomography (CT) of the spine revealed a hypodense penetrating object that was introduced from the posterior aspect of the sacrum into the dural space and then stopped in the S1 vertebral body, and the object did not penetrate the anterior cortex of the vertebral body (Figures 1(b) and 1(c)).Because of the possibility of pelvic organ injury in cases of penetrating sacral injury, we consulted with an expert general surgeon. Based on normal findings on physical exam and pelvic CT scanning, our consultant surgeon assured us. Thereafter, the patient was transferred to the operating room. Under general anesthesia, the patient was operated in prone position. Muscle dissection revealed a wooden foreign body on the sacral lamina that passed into the S1 body (Figure 1(d)). First, a laminectomy of an intact superior portion of the S1 lamina was performed and the wood was released from the surrounding bone, and finally, it was pulled out. Before the wood was removed, the dural sac was mildly compressed above the level continuously, to prevent CSF from filling our surgical field. Also, a portion of the patient＊s clothes was removed from the vertebral body (Figure 1(e)). The bone defect was massively irrigated, and the defect of the dura was repaired with Prolene suture separately in a watertight manner. Thereafter, the Valsalva maneuver was performed and no CSF leakage was observed. Finally, the surgical wound was closed in a layer-by-layer manner. The patient was under close observation for 3 days and then discharged without any deficit or complication. The patient was visited 2 weeks later and it was observed that his wound had healed. Unfortunately, as a result of the different nationality of the patient (Afghanistan), we did not see him again, but we were informed by phone that he was still doing fine, 8 months after the procedure.
Only very few reports were found on spinal penetrating trauma with wooden objects; hence, it is extremely rare [2]. All over the world, we were unable to find any report on penetrating wood in the sacral area. Although the first sacral root injury is possible, the only sphincter disturbance is more prevalent in this area and other neurological deficits are less common. In these situations, performing an accurate physical examination can reveal any preoperative deficits and target planning.
As a result of the structural components of wood and its large air content, it is difficult to see it on imaging protocols. Wooden objects are usually missed on plain radiographs. On the CT scan, wood is a hypodense mass and, sometimes, it could be confused as air. However, performing a CT scan can identify sites of foreign body and its trajectory [3]. Imokawa et al. suggested magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as an adjunctive tool for the diagnosis of wooden objects [4]. The careful preoperative imaging can help us for accurate surgical planning to remove all wooden foreign body portions. MRI was not performed because our patient had CSF leakage from the dirty wound, and it was necessary to treat him as soon as possible. On the other hand, a foreign body was seen clearly on the CT scan.
As a result of their organic nature, wooden objects are sources of infection and all wooden foreign bodies should be totally removed from the wound carefully [2, 5]. The surgical management of these patients should include high volume irrigation. Meticulous repairing of any tearing of the dura is the rule to prevent subsequent meningitis. The fascia should be repaired to prevent subsequent leakage. We routinely do not prescribe widespread antibiotics for these patients. Anyway, a true diagnosis and precise treatment can forecast a good final prognosis for these patients.
This study presents an extremely rare case of sacral penetrating injury with a wooden object. The surgical removal of the foreign body is recommended as soon as possible. In these cases, meticulous repairing of torn dura matter and fascia must be the cornerstone of our surgical strategy.
Seizure-Associated ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction in Absence of Plaque Rupture
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is a very common cause of morbidity and mortality in the U.S. Here, we present a case of acute ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) in the setting of seizure activity. In this rare case, we have data from optical coherence tomography (OCT) that showed no plaque disruption, showing the role of OCT in understanding the pathophysiology of STEMI and providing some ideas for the mechanism of this seizure-induced STEMI.
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is a very common cause of morbidity and mortality in the U.S., accounting for approximately 1.5 million of hospital discharges and costing more than 150 billion dollars per year according to the American Heart Association [1]. Moreover, ACS includes unstable angina, non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), and ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). The pathophysiology includes atherosclerotic plaque rupture or plaque erosion [2]. NSTEMI occurs in the setting of subtotal occlusion of the culprit coronary artery. On the other hand, STEMI occurs due to complete occlusion of the culprit coronary artery [3]. In most cases, the sine qua non of acute myocardial injury is ST elevation on the 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG). Other noncardiac conditions including acute cerebrovascular events can produce acute ST elevation but are rare [4, 5]. We present a case of acute ST elevation MI in the setting of seizure activity. In this rare case, we have data from optical coherence tomography that showed no plaque disruption.
A 75-year-old African American lady was admitted to the University Hospitals Richmond Medical Center for severe progressive headaches in the setting of hypertensive emergency. Her past medical history included coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) 20 years ago and subsequent multiple prior percutaneous coronary interventions (PCIs) to her right coronary artery (RCA) and left circumflex artery (LCx), and most recently 10 months before with a 2.75?℅?14?mm Resolute Integrity drug-eluting stent (DES) for an in-stent restenosis of her mid-RCA. Echocardiogram obtained in 2015 revealed reduced ejection fraction of 40每45% and regional wall motion abnormalities involving apical septal and basal inferior segments and basal and mid inferior septum. She did not have any cardiac symptoms at the time of this admission. Her initial ECG showed sinus rhythm, left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) by Cornell criteria, and inferior Q waves (Figure 1). Troponin I was 0.04?ng/mL (normal?<?0.05?ng/mL). A noncontrast head CT showed no acute changes. She was admitted for further management. Hydralazine was used to gradually lower her elevated blood pressure. A routine second ECG 13 hours later at 04:53 AM showed similar findings. Serial troponin I values were 0.05?ng/mL and 0.05?ng/mL six hours apart. The next morning at 07:35 AM she suffered a tonic-clonic seizure that lasted for 5 minutes. She was treated successfully with lorazepam. An ECG at 08:03 AM after her seizure showed 2.5 to 3?mm acute ST elevations in leads II, III, and aVF (Figure 2). She was loaded with aspirin and ticagrelor and was started on heparin drip. Her blood pressure was 187/80?mmHg. A bedside limited echocardiogram showed EF 50% with hypokinesis in the basal and mid inferior walls and inferolateral walls. The 2.5?mm acute ST elevations in inferior leads were persistent for 40 minutes, and later she was transferred to the University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center for primary PCI. Her coronary angiography showed a chronically occluded mid-LAD, a mid-LCx with a patent stent, and an 80% in-stent restenosis in the mid-RCA (RCA) at the site of prior intervention with TIMI flow 3 before intervention (Figures 3 and 4). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Figure 5) revealed malapposition of the prior overlapping stent and no thrombus or plaque rupture. She received a 2.5?℅?38?mm Xience DES of her mid-RCA stenotic lesion, with good flow after intervention. Postprocedure ECG showed resolution of the ST segment elevation (Figure 6). The next day troponin I was 29.86?ng/ml and 16.76?ng/ml twelve hours apart. A complete transthoracic echo on day 3 after STEMI showed left ventricular ejection fraction of 50每55% and persistent basal and mid inferior wall and inferolateral wall hypokinesis. The patient＊s mental status remained altered and took two days to return to her baseline after PCI. The neurologist＊s main impression was posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) secondary to malignant hypertension causing seizures. She was discharged on beta-blockers, dual antiplatelet agents, amlodipine, and statin along with her other medications.
Acute coronary syndrome is typically used to encompass a spectrum ranging from unstable angina, non-ST elevation myocardial infarction, and ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) where the postulated mechanism involves plaque erosion or rupture which this patient did not have [1, 6每8]. This case shows that acute ST elevation on the ECG can occur without acute plaque erosion or rupture in the setting of seizure. ACh provocation was not performed to test for vasospasm. We postulate seizure-induced hypercatecholaminergic-mediated coronary vasospasm at the mid-RCA as the cause of the STEMI. Prior reports of acute ST elevation in noncardiac conditions such as subarachnoid hemorrhage and cocaine abuse postulate acute catecholamine surge causing cardiac myocyte and diffuse coronary vasospasm as the mechanism, especially at the sites of atherosclerosis [4, 9, 10]. The malapposition could have been identified and corrected if OCT had been utilized at the time of her prior intervention. Optical coherence tomography (Figure 5) is useful both to guide intervention and to understand pathophysiological mechanisms in patients with acute ST elevation on the ECG. ECG monitoring is important in patients with acute neurological conditions [11, 12].
Acute seizures can cause acute STEMI in the absence of plaque rupture or erosion. Optical coherence tomography is helpful to discern this type from others like plaque rupture or coronary artery dissection. Acute catecholamine surge每mediated vasospasm can be postulated as the cause of STEMI in this patient.
A Rare Case of Multifocal Papillary Thyroid Cancer in Bilateral Thyroid Cysts
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) can present as a thyroid cyst. In its more aggressive form, PTC may be multifocal in nature and is associated with a poorer prognosis. In patients whom PTC is diagnosed incidentally after a diagnostic lobectomy, the decision whether to offer completion thyroidectomy is sometimes challenging to make if such patients fall in the ＆low-to-intermediate＊ risk category. We present a case of a 55-year-old lady who had a predominantly cystic left thyroid nodule with no suspicious features on ultrasound as well as 2 subcentimetre simple right-sided cysts. She subsequently underwent left hemithyroidectomy, and this reported a T2 PTC in the thyroid cyst. This was followed by completion thyroidectomy which yielded the surprising finding of PTC in the two tiny right sided cysts. This case highlights the need for vigilance in managing patients with thyroid cysts even though thyroid ultrasound scan did not reveal any overt suspicious features.
Multifocality is not uncommon in papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) and is associated with more aggressive tumour behaviour. Cystic thyroid nodules are often benign, and ultrasound surveillance alone is regarded as a reasonable option for cystic nodules with a very low suspicion for malignancy. We report a case of multifocal (MF) cystic PTC that first presented as a solitary thyroid cyst.
Mrs C is 55 years of age and presented with a left neck swelling that was noticed incidentally some days prior. She did not have any compressive symptoms related to the neck lump. Clinical examination revealed a 4?cm left smooth thyroid nodule. Her thyroid function test was normal while the ultrasound scan showed a 5.9 by 3.8?cm predominantly cystic nodule with a small solid component (Figure 1). The nodule was smooth and did not demonstrate any increased vascularity. The right lobe had 2 benign looking simple cysts (0.4 by 0.4?cm, 0.3 by 0.3?cm). There was no cervical lymphadenopathy demonstrated.
Ultrasound-guided FNA was performed, and the aspirate reported mucoid fluid suggestive of cyst contents. In view of the size of the left cystic nodule, Mrs C was counselled for a left hemithyroidectomy. This was completed uneventfully, and the final histology was that of a pT2 (2.1?cm) PTC without extrathyroidal extension nor lymphatic invasion. In view of the diagnosis, she opted for a completion right thyroidectomy because she wanted to minimize any risk of disease recurrence and optimize postoperative surveillance. The histology of the right lobe showed 2 foci of PTC each about 3?mm.
Postoperatively, Mrs C underwent a radioiodine scan which did not reveal any distant metastasis. She was also given an ablative dose of RAI to obliterate a small thyroid bed remnant gland and then started on thyroxine replacement. At about 1 yr follow up, the surveillance ultrasound thyroid scan and thyroglobin marker did not show any sign of cancer recurrence.
Multifocal tumours are found in 15.7%每37.2% of PTC patients [1每3], and it has been reported that preoperative prediction of MFPTC is possible in up to 67% of patients [4]. MFPTC is a more aggressive disease compared to unifocal PTC; it is associated with more frequent nodal disease, and the number of tumour foci correlates with LN metastases [2, 5]. Multifocality is also found to be an independent risk factor for neck recurrence, distant metastasis, and cancer death [3, 6]. The incidence of BRAF mutation is also higher in MFPTC compared to unifocal PTC [3]. For the above considerations, total thyroidectomy is often the done for PTCs?>?1?cm.
The majority of cystic thyroid nodules are benign and do not require surgical intervention. In their analysis of PTC, Lee et al. found that only 5% of partially cystic lesions were malignant and these nodules were associated with microcalcifications [7]. Likewise, Henrichsen et al. reported that only 2.5 % of carcinoma were predominantly cystic and all were associated with suspicious features such as microcalcifications [8].
Under the 2017 American Thyroid Association guidelines [9], sonographic features suggestive of PTC include the presence of microcalcifications, nodule hypoechogenicity, irregular margins, and a shape taller than wide. Partially cystic nodules without these sonographic features are recommended for FNA only if they are at least 1.5?cm (※low suspicion§), and for nodules stratified under ※very low suspicion,§ observation without FNA is regarded as a reasonable option. In our case, it was unfortunate that the patient＊s ultrasound scan did not reveal any worrisome features other than a relatively small eccentric solid component in the left cystic nodule.
Given our patient＊s left nodule was predominantly cystic in nature, it perhaps comes as no surprise that the FNA could only yield ※cyst fluid.§ This form of aspirate falls under the ※nondiagnostic§ category of the Bethesda system, and metaanalysis actually suggests that up to 16.8% of such nodules are malignant [10]. Even the presence of atypical epithelial cells on FNA may not be of additional value because such features are observed in specimens from benign thyroid cysts [11, 12].
In nodules ≡4?cm, ultrasound-guided FNA was found to be less reliable and gave a false negative rate of 10.4% [12]. Because of this limitation, thyroid lobectomy is strongly recommended in nodules that are ≡4?cm. At minimum, repeat FNA ought to be done to exclude a malignancy [13]. This size criterion was the main consideration behind offering surgery to our patient since her FNA was unhelpful, and ultrasound scan stratified her lesion to be at ※low suspicion§ of malignancy.
Following the diagnosis of PTC in the left thyroid cyst, the question arises on whether the patient requires a completion thyroidectomy. Adopting the 2017 ATA guidelines, ※completion thyroidectomy should be offered to patients for whom a bilateral thyroidectomy would have been recommended had the diagnosis been available before the initial surgery.§ With a PTC?<?4?cm, no evidence of extrathyroidal extension or lymph node metastases by examination or imaging, the patient would fall into the ※low-to intermediate-risk§ category and in fact qualify for lobectomy only. For patients aged >45 years or have contralateral nodules, a completion thyroidectomy is also an option.
In this case, what the final histology in the right lobe serves as a reminder is that multifocality is a clear and present danger in PTC despite what the preoperative ultrasound imaging revealed, that is, benign features of subcentimetre cysts. Therefore the ATA＊s consideration of ※contralateral thyroid nodules§ should be interpreted more liberally such that even benign looking tiny cysts are viewed with caution.
PTC can present as a cystic thyroid nodule and involve bilateral lobes in its more aggressive form. In the absence of benign cytology on FNA and despite the lack of suspicious features on ultrasonography, cystic thyroid nodules should be treated with caution if they are ≡4?cm, and thus surgery is recommended to avoid missing a thyroid malignancy. Following the diagnosis of PTC, completion thyroidectomy should be offered to a patient if the preoperative ultrasound does not show a pristine contralateral lobe.
The Role of Adjuvant Radiotherapy for a Case of Primary Breast Sarcoma: A Plan Comparison between Three Modern Techniques and a Review of the Literature
A 65-year-old woman, affected by a malignant fibrous histiocytoma (undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma) of the left breast, presented to our department to receive the postoperative radiotherapy. In the absence of prospective and randomized trials and investigations on breast sarcoma irradiation in literature, due to the rarity of this pathology, the role of adjuvant radiotherapy remains unclear. To identify the best radiotherapy technique for this patient, three methods were compared: 3D conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT), intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), and volumetric arc therapy (VMAT) or RapidArc? (RA). 50?Gy was prescribed to the chest wall and 66?Gy to the tumor bed. Three plans were designed, and target coverage, organs-at-risk sparing, and treatment efficiency were compared. IMRT and RA improved both target coverage and dose uniformity/homogeneity. Planning objective for the lung is always satisfied comparing the different techniques, but the volume receiving 20?Gy drops to 17% by RA compared to 3D-CRT. The heart volume receiving 30?Gy was 10% by IMRT, against 13% and 16% by RA and 3D-CRT. The monitor unit (MU) required by 3D-CRT was 527?MU, followed by RA and IMRT. Treatment time was similar with 3D-CRT and RA but doubled using IMRT. Although all three radiotherapy techniques offered a satisfactory solution, RA and IMRT offer some improvement on target coverage, dose homogeneity, and conformity for this particular case of breast sarcoma.
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma (undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma) is considered to be the most common soft tissue sarcoma of middle and late adult life and characteristically affects the extremities and, less frequently, the retroperitoneum of elderly male patients. However, its occurrence in the breast is extremely uncommon, especially in patients with no history of radiation for a prior breast carcinoma or in cases that do not arise in association with a malignant phyllodes tumor [1]. Due to the low incidence, the therapeutic recommendations are difficult to establish with evolving techniques and limited patient numbers. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment for all breast sarcomas, with either wide local excision or total mastectomy [2每5]. There is an evidence that the tumor＊s size was predictive of local recurrence and overall survival [6, 7]. After surgical resection, radiation therapy (RT) should be used to improve local control in the cases in which the tumor is larger than 5?cm and in the cases with close or positive surgical margins. Postoperative RT has not been prospectively examined, and doses and treatment regimens have been infrequently described. Current knowledge is mostly based on numerous case reports and relatively small retrospective series; unlike epithelial breast cancer, there is no high level evidence to support a standard of care for primary and/or adjuvant therapy, but a trend of benefit for irradiated patients was reported, and therefore, adjuvant radiotherapy with higher doses was recommended for primary breast sarcomas, especially if the tumor is of larger size or high grade [8每10]. Johnstone et al. [11] observed excellent local control in patients who received adjuvant radiotherapy. McGowan et al. [12] reported that the cause-specific survival of the group, which received over 48?Gy radiation dose, was 91%; in comparison, the group which received no or less than 48?Gy radiation dose had a cause-specific survival of only 50%. Adjuvant radiotherapy decreased local failure from 34% to 13% in a series of 59 patients, according to a retrospective review of the M. D. Anderson experience [7], although this did not reach statistical significance probably due to the small number of patients.
The classical approach to the breast irradiation is the technique of two tangent fields, and also in the case of breast sarcoma, this technique is usually applied [13]. However, the advanced technologies such as intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) and RapidArc (RA) allow to administer higher doses, improving the dose conformity compared to 3D conformal radiotherapy, as already demonstrated for the treatment of breast cancer [14每17].
The aim is to present a case report of a left breast primary sarcoma, describing and comparing three modern radiotherapy techniques in order to identify the best approach for this patient. Moreover, we report a brief review of the literature about the role of adjuvant radiotherapy in the management of undifferentiated pleomorphic breast sarcoma.
A 65-year-old woman, who presented a malignant fibrous histiocytoma (undifferentiated pleomorphic breast sarcoma) of the left breast and underwent the mastectomy, presented to our department to receive the postoperative radiotherapy. The lesion was greater than 5?cm with positive surgical margins and of high grade according to the NCI (National Cancer Institute) criteria for grading soft tissue sarcomas, with the impossibility to obtain a clear margin. No first-line chemotherapy was scheduled. According to the recommendation on the management by the ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines, the postoperative radiation therapy should be administered with the best technique available, at a dose of 50每60?Gy, with fractions of 1.8每2?Gy, possibly with boosts up to 66每68?Gy, depending on the presentation and quality of surgery [18, 19]. So, two clinical target volumes were delineated on a series of CT slices by an experienced radiation oncologist: (i) the CTV50 which covered the entire left chest wall and (ii) the CTV66 defined by the tumor bed.
In Figure 1, a picture including three orthogonal planes from the CT data set of the patient is reported to appreciate the patient-specific anatomic complexity, which determines the complexity of the plan.
The 3D conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT) treatment included two phases: a dose of 50?Gy was administered to the chest wall (2.0?Gy/fraction) during the first phase and a dose of 66?Gy to the tumor bed after the sequential boost (2.0?Gy/fraction). Unlike IMRT and RA, the plans were designed to deliver in a single-phase process (with simultaneous integrated boost (SIB)). The purpose of the simultaneous integrated boost (SIB) fractionation strategy proposed in this study is essentially to reduce the length of the treatment in order to improve patient satisfaction and clinical throughput. Limited investigations on SIB in breast irradiation are available in literature, proposing [16, 20每23] different schemes: 28?℅?(1.81?+?2.3)?Gy, 31?℅?(1.66?+?2.38)?Gy, or 25?℅?(2.0?+?2.4)?Gy, for remaining breast and tumor bed targets. In all cases, the SIB plans with IMRT proved to have superior quality compared to sequential treatments, and the authors [22] proposed to consider SIB as the standard treatment for breast cancer. In the present study, it was adopted a further acceleration in the fractionation planning for 25 fractions (to keep treatment time limited to five weeks) of 2.0?Gy to the chest wall with a simultaneous integrated boost of 2.64 to the tumor bed. This fractionation has yet to be proven to be clinically acceptable; however, it does not impact the significance of comparative results.
All plans compared in this study were designed by the same planner on the Varian Eclipse treatment planning system (TPS) (version 8.6.10) with 6 and 15?MV photon beams from a Varian Trilogy accelerator equipped with a Millennium multileaf collimator (MLC) with 120 leaves. The anisotropic analytical algorithm (AAA) was used for all techniques, and the PB (pencil beam) algorithm was also employed for 3D-CRT plans. The progressive resolution optimizer (PRO) was used to optimize the RA plan. The dynamic sliding window method was used for the IMRT plan. The dose calculation grid was set to 2.5?mm for all plans.
The first phase of the 3D-CRT technique consisted of two no-coplanar tangential beams at 304∼ and 129∼ gantry angles, with collimator angle at 10∼ and 350∼, respectively. Instead, the boost was achieved by three coplanar beams with gantry angles 300∼, 115∼, and 30∼ and collimator angles 280∼, 80∼, and 0∼, respectively. Both for the first phase and for the boost, dynamic wedges were used to minimize the dose inhomogeneity.
The IMRT beam geometry consisted of 5 coplanar fields with the following gantry angles: 100∼, 80∼, 340∼, 320∼, and 300∼, and the collimator angle was set at 30∼. Dose rate of 400?MU/min was selected.
For the RA, a dual arc (one arc clockwise and another arc counterclockwise) was set up with a gantry angle ranging from 129∼ to 300∼ and a collimator angle of 30∼, with a dose rate of 400?MU/min as the upper limit.
Throughout the IMRT and RA optimization, for all PTVs, plans aimed to achieve at least 95% of the PTV receiving more than 95% of the prescribed dose and a maximum lower than 107% to the 5% of the PTV66, while keeping the mean dose of each PTV as close as possible to the corresponding prescription. For the left lung, the conventional objectives were considered as acceptable, that is, the mean lung dose?<?15?Gy and the volume receiving 20?Gy?<?20每30% [24]. Similarly for the heart, the mean dose?<?26?Gy and the volume receiving 30?Gy?<?46% were set as planning objectives. For the ribs, the maximum dose?<?70?Gy was set as an objective. Moreover, the planning strategy was also to minimize the mean dose to the contralateral lung.
All plans were normalized in order to guarantee that the dose received by 95% of the PTVs was greater than or equal to 95% of the prescribed dose (D95?>?95).
To assess the compliance with dosimetric objectives assigned, a comparison based on the cumulative dose-volume histograms (DVHs) was performed for all three treatment techniques. For the PTV50 and PTV66, the parameters D5% and D95% (doses received by the 5% and 95% of the target volume, resp.) were used as surrogate markers for the maximum and minimum doses. The mean dose (Dmean) to both PTVs was also evaluated. The degree of conformity of the plans was defined as the ratio between the volume receiving at least 95% of the prescribed dose and the volume of the PTV. A conformity index (CI) equal to 1 corresponds to ideal conformation. If the CI is less than 1, the target volume is only partially irradiated, while a CI greater than 1 indicates that the irradiated volume is greater than the target volume including healthy tissues. Also, the homogeneity index (HI) was calculated. The HI was expressed by D5%?D95%/DP, where D5 and D95 are the doses to 5% and 95% of the target volume and DP is the prescribed dose. The ideal value is zero when D5 and D95 are equal. The CI and HI were calculated for both PTV50 and PTV66.
The DVHs for OAR were also calculated and compared, using as evaluation tools the following parameters: the mean doses to the heart and lungs, the volume of the left lung receiving 20?Gy (V20), the volume of the heart receiving 30?Gy (V30), and the doses to 10% and 50% of the right lung (D10 and D50).
Monitor units (MUs) and delivery times were also analyzed for the three techniques. The delivery time was manually measured as the time from beam on to beam off.
Table 1 shows the DVH indices of the PTV50 and PTV66 in different treatment techniques. The planning objectives are also listed in order to assess the performances of plans. For 3D-CRT dose calculation, both AAA and PB algorithms were used, and the respective results are also listed in Table 1.
Both RA and IMRT plans result in a better target coverage compared to the 3D-CRT, accompanied with an increased uniformity and homogeneity. The highest values of D95% for PTV50 and PTV66 are obtained by IMRT and RA, respectively. Globally, the IMRT achieves the best results. As shown in Table 1, the dosimetric differences between AAA and PB algorithms for 3D-CRT plans are not substantial. A picture of the axial dose distributions with the three techniques is shown in Figure 2. The comparison between three DVHs obtained by 3D-CRT, IMRT, and RA is shown in Figures 3每5.
The DVH parameters for OAR are also summarized in Table 1. The constraints set for the left lung are always satisfied by all the techniques, but the volume receiving 20?Gy decreases using RA and IMRT. Otherwise, the lowest mean dose to the ipsilateral lung is observed with the conformational technique. The mean doses to the heart increased with IMRT and RA, compared to 3D-CRT. The V30 of the heart obtained with IMRT is the lowest. There is an increased volume of the contralateral lung exposed to low doses both in the IMRT and RA plans. Also for the OAR, the dosimetric differences between AAA and PB algorithms for 3D-CRT plans are not substantial. Measurement of delivery time results in the lowest treatment time for RA (＞1.5?min) closely followed by 3D-CRT, whereas IMRT was somewhat time-consuming. The lowest number of MU required by 3D-CRT is 527, followed by RA and IMRT. Detailed results are given in Table 2.
The patient received radiation therapy in 2013 by 3D-CRT. After 3 years of follow-up, the patient remained disease free, and no evidence of local or systemic disease was detected. In 2016, bowel metastasis was detected with 18F-FDG PET and later confirmed with biopsy. Actually, the patient was treated with chemotherapy.
Primary undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma arising de novo in the breast is extremely rare [25]. Qiu et al. summarized that 65 cases have been reported until 2013 [26]. Our literature review reveals that, to date, there are only five other cases presented [27每31]. Moreover, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma in the breast is an aggressive, fast-growing tumor with a high rate of local recurrence (44%) and distal metastases (42%) [1], but the therapeutic recommendations are difficult to establish with evolving techniques and limited patient numbers. The most important treatment element in maximizing disease-free survival and overall survival is complete surgical removal of the tumor [32每36], although a standard surgical practice is still not known, owing to the rarity of this tumor. In the absence of prospective and randomized trials, response rates to systemic therapies remain poor [37]. Some authors suggest that postoperative radiation may play an important role in reducing local recurrence and should be considered for patients in whom surgical margins are not adequate or microscopically involved [38, 39]. However, the impact of RT on overall survival remains uncertain [40]. In one large study, patients with high-grade MFH of the extremities who underwent excisional surgery followed by postoperative RT experienced a 10-year relapse-free survival of 62% and an overall survival rate of 80%, certainly representing improved rates over historical reports [41]. Although further research is needed to better define the role of RT, the current NCCN guidelines state that adjuvant therapy should be considered on an individual case basis [19]. Radiation therapy should be given as an adjuvant to surgery only for primary intermediate- to high-grade breast sarcomas and a size larger than 5?cm. Recent review studies [2, 42, 43] proposed to treat patients according to the clinical practice guidelines in use for soft tissue sarcomas with a multidisciplinary team approach necessitating surgeons, pathologists, radiotherapists, and medical oncologists to improve overall survival. The treatment of a breast sarcoma must assure primarily an efficient target coverage with high prescribed doses to provide a better local control because even after radical surgery, local failures are common. This implies an appropriate prescription dose with at least 60?Gy to the tumor bed. The purpose of the present investigation was to assess, for a woman with this rare pathology, the quality of two advanced treatment techniques compared to the conventional radiotherapy, quantifying the DVH variations between the different solutions, and to appraise logistic aspects as treatment efficiency. Previously, the breast irradiation with advanced techniques was investigated, and the results [44] showed that, in certain cases, IMRT or RA/VMAT is definitely beneficial compared to conventional conformal approaches. The benefit of these advanced techniques was mainly demonstrated for a particularly complex and rare case as well as for bilateral breast cancer, left-sided breast cancer, small breast size, and funnel chest [16, 45, 46]. Also, for the postmastectomy irradiation, newer strategies such as IMRT were shown to improve significantly the dose distributions to the chest wall, maximizing dose homogeneity and conformity [47]. The data shown here suggest that all techniques are satisfactory, although RA and IMRT offer some improvement on target coverage, compared to the conformal radiotherapy. Comparing the DVH of the 3D-CRT to that of RA or IMRT, as shown in Figures 3 and 4, a substantial improvement of the dose homogeneity and conformity is clear. The best target coverage for the chest wall and tumor bed was achieved by using IMRT and RA, respectively (Figure 3, Table 1). Moreover, the conventional tangential field technique achieved fair target coverage only at the cost of delivering doses?>?20?Gy to relatively large volumes of the ipsilateral lung, while similar better sparing of the ipsilateral lung was obtained using both RA and IMRT. Instead, the mean doses to the heart and contralateral lung were higher using RA compared to IMRT, mainly due to the larger volume exposed to lower radiation (Figure 2). The higher doses received by the heart, compared with those obtained by 3D-CRT, would be justified by patient-specific anatomic complexity partially due to the surgery and quite unfavorable boost position (Figure 1). Recent studies [48每50] showed that the risk of cardiovascular disease increases with mean cardiac doses in the women who received external beam radiotherapy for breast cancer, and the innovations in treatment planning are therefore under investigation, including intensity modulation and various techniques for the control of respiratory motion, in order to reduce the dose received by the heart. At our department, breath-hold technique has been implemented only recently, so not available in 2013 for more investigation. Henson et al. [51] demonstrated that the radiation-related risks were larger in the third decade after exposure than during the first two decades. Nevertheless, the OAR issue is very different between breast cancer and breast sarcoma because the life expectancy is not so high. Many patients survive for many years after diagnosis and treatment for breast cancer, and therefore, the awareness was created to reduce the dose received by the heart, in the hope of minimizing the long-term morbidity and mortality associated with the treatment of breast cancer. Unfortunately, the prognosis of sarcoma is still poor, and the risk of local recurrence is very frequent. For these reasons, the target coverage is the main goal, while OAR sparing could be considered secondary.
Another important objective was to assess the treatment efficiency. Naturally, both RA and IMRT techniques entail an increment of MU compared to the standard tangential field solution. Anyway, the RapidArc treatment time was 55% shorter than IMRT, implying a reduction of the risk of intrafractional movements. In addition, RA allowed a strong reduction of MU compared to IMRT (by 54%). So, the delivery parameters confirmed that RA was more efficient compared to IMRT. A recent study [13] reported the case of a 37-year-old male patient who received external radiotherapy for a malignant fibrous histiocytoma. The patient was offered a postoperative RT because of inadequate surgical margins. A total dose of 50?Gy/25f with two tangential wedged fields by using 6?MV photons of a linear accelerator was given to his left chest wall. He remained alive and well after 42 months of follow-up. Instead, Liu et al. [28] presented a case of a patient with carcinosarcoma of the left breast (mucinous carcinoma and MFH). Combined modality treatment, which consists of 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy followed by 50?Gy/25f to the whole breast and 10?Gy/5f to the tumor bed, brings at least 2 years of disease-free survival (DFS). Anyway, no detailed information about the irradiation techniques was reported in literature, and no previous paper showed the application of intensity-modulated radiotherapy in the case of breast sarcoma. So, according to the previous results, we believe that the increase in the number of cases in the literature will help and contribute to the embodiment of the therapeutic algorithm of the disease in question 
Invasive Listeriosis of Intracardiac Device
Introduction. Listeria monocytogenes is a food-borne pathogen which can cause invasive infection in immunocompromised adults. Listeria has been known to cause infections during pregnancy and in older adults. Listeria endocarditis is a rare condition. A case of listeria-related intracardiac device infection is reported below. Case Report. A 74-year-old male with a past medical history of coronary artery disease, congestive cardiac failure, permanent atrial fibrillation status after nodal ablation, and placement of a biventricular pacemaker presented to the hospital with complaints of generalized fatigue. He was found to have listeria bacteremia, and transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed pacemaker lead vegetation. The patient was treated with 6 weeks of vancomycin followed by oral suppression with amoxicillin. Discussion. Listeria can affect native valves, prosthetic valves, or nonvalvular intracardiac devices. The mean age of prosthetic valve endocarditis has been reported to be 67 years with male-to-female ratio 1.7?:?1 and mitral-to-aortic valve ratio 1.3?:?1. There have been case reports of listeria prosthetic valve endocarditis; however, there is paucity of literature on listeria-related pacemaker lead infection. Treatment is mostly a combination of penicillin and aminoglycosides for 4每6 weeks. Surgical removal of the infected device is preferred. Invasive listeriosis is a rare but fatal entity which should be identified and treated promptly to ensure a good outcome.
Listeria monocytogenes is a facultative intracellular, Gram-positive aerobic rod which is mostly transmitted from contaminated food and can cause benign diarrheal illness in immunocompetent individuals [1]. It is a food-borne pathogen spread through consumption of contaminated food like dairy (raw unpasteurized milk or eggs, soft cheese), poultry, fish, shellfish, and so on [2]. Maternal infections during pregnancy are known to cause miscarriages, preterm labor, and neonatal meningitis. Invasive listeriosis can occur in immunocompromised patients manifesting as meningitis or bacteremia/septicemia [1]. We report a case of invasive listeriosis and pacemaker lead infection treated with vancomycin.
A 74-year-old male with a past medical history of coronary artery disease, congestive cardiac failure, permanent atrial fibrillation status-post nodal ablation, and placement of a biventricular pacemaker presented to the hospital with complaints of generalized fatigue. The patient denied other constitutional symptoms including chest pain, dyspnea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or dysuria. Vitals were as follows: afebrile, blood pressure 116/80, pulse 72, respiratory rate 21, and saturating well on 3 litres/minute nasal cannula. Physical examination showed pitting edema in bilateral lower extremities till knees, decreased bibasilar breath sounds, and jugular venous distension. There was no rash, painful nodes or splinter hemorrhages. Holosystolic murmur was heard at the apex, JVD ‵18?cm H2O. Laboratory investigations showed normal WBC count, neutrophilia with 17 bands, 26 lymphocytes, and 8 monocytes. CRP was elevated at 4.3. The patient also had a troponin level of 0.22; however, this was found to be chronically elevated. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly, but no pulmonary vascular congestion, consolidation, nor effusions. Urinalysis did not show any evidence of infection. Overnight, the patient developed fever with a maximum temperature of 39.2∼C.
Blood cultures turned positive for Gram-positive rods at which time the patient was started on vancomycin. Echocardiogram was performed due to concerns of endocarditis and showed left ventricular ejection fraction 20每25%, severe diffuse hypokinesis, moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, and a 1?mm mobile strand in the left atrium attached to pacer lead concerning vegetation. Final blood cultures revealed Listeria monocytogenes, and two sets of subsequent cultures grew listeria. TEE was not performed as it would not have changed management. The patient was not a surgical candidate for pacemaker removal due to comorbidities and advanced heart failure. Antibiotic therapy with vancomycin was continued. Ampicillin was not used due to high sodium content in the infusion in setting of decreased systolic function. The patient received 6 weeks of IV vancomycin followed by oral suppression with amoxicillin. There was appropriate clinical response to the abovementioned treatment with resolution of fever and subjective improvement.
Invasive listeriosis has been reported in immunocompromised adults. The ability to cause invasive infection is largely dependent on host factors as well as bacteria＊s capacity to cross the intestinal barrier [2]. The mechanism of bacterial inoculation in our patient is unclear. The CDC reported a case fatality rate of 21% out of 1651 cases reported nationwide from 2009 to 2011 with an average incidence of 0.29 cases per 100,000 populations. Fifty-eight percent of cases were >65 years and 14% infections were pregnancy-related. Most of the cases not associated with pregnancy were <65 years, and they had underlying comorbidities such as malignancy, immunosuppressive therapy, diabetes, renal failure, congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, alcohol abuse, and HIV/AIDS [3].
Listeria endocarditis is a rare condition which can affect native valves, prosthetic valves [4, 5], or nonvalvular intracardiac devices [6]. A review of 68 patients with listeria endocarditis from 1955 to 2000 showed that most patients were immunosuppressed and did not have a documented exposure to contaminated food. Patients with native valve endocarditis had a higher mortality rate compared to those with prosthetic valve endocarditis [5].
Prosthetic valve endocarditis may present with new valvular regurgitation, dehiscence of prosthetic valve, and intracardiac mass of paravalvular abscess [4, 7, 8]. Best et al. reviewed 30 cases of listeria prosthetic valve endocarditis and reported a mean age of 67 years with male-to-female ratio 1.7?:?1 and mitral-to-aortic valve ratio 1.3?:?1. The most common clinical features were fever (89%), new murmur (74%), and atrial fibrillation (37%) [4]. Surgical intervention is warranted in patients with valve perforation or rupture, acute valvular dysfunction with heart failure, anterior mitral leaflet?>10?mm in size, embolic events on antibiotic therapy, and so on [7].
Cardiac device-related infections can present with signs and symptoms similar to infective endocarditis (endovascular portion of device is involved) or as local infection if the device is implanted subcutaneously [9]. The reported rate of pacemaker infections is 0.13% to 19.9% and vegetation can be found on the tricuspid valve or anywhere along the course of electrode including the endocardium of the right atrium/ventricle [9].
Blood cultures or surgical cultures (valve) along with echocardiographic findings are diagnostic; however, bacterial gene PCR has been shown to be useful in culture-negative listeriosis [10]. Treatment consists of antimicrobials, with or without surgery. However, removal of the device is preferred due to high rate of relapsing bacteremia in spite of antibiotic therapy [9]. Surgical intervention in the abovementioned case was deferred due to high surgical risk. Penicillin and gentamicin combination for 4每6 weeks can be used; other treatment options include vancomycin or linezolid [8, 10]. Patients with penicillin allergy can be treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or erythromycin [1]. Our patient was treated with vancomycin and long-term suppression with oral amoxicillin.
There have been case reports of listeria prosthetic valve endocarditis; however, there is paucity of literature on listeria-related pacemaker lead infection. The treatment is mostly with beta-lactams; however, it is varied on case-by-case basis. Invasive listeriosis is a rare but fatal entity and should be treated promptly to ensure a good outcome.
Military Histoplasmosis in a Patient with Rheumatoid Arthritis
Miliary histoplasmosis is a rare presentation that may mimic miliary tuberculosis. We report a case of miliary histoplasmosis in a 52-year-old male who was being treated with hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate, and sulfasalazine for his rheumatoid arthritis and presented to the emergency department with shortness of breath and fevers. Computed tomography (CT) chest revealed miliary pulmonary nodules. Urine Histoplasma antigen and serum Histoplasma antigen were negative; however, Coccidioides immitis complement immunofixation assay and Coccidioides IgM were positive. The patient was initiated on treatment for pulmonary coccidioidomycosis and immunosuppression was held. However, a few days later, Histoplasma capsulatum was isolated from cultures from bronchoscopy. This case highlights the difficulty in diagnosing histoplasmosis in immunocompromised patients and the importance of having a broad differential diagnosis for miliary pulmonary nodules. Tissue culture and histopathology remain the gold standard for the diagnosis of histoplasmosis. Further research needs to be conducted to determine the optimal duration of histoplasmosis treatment in immunocompromised patients.
Histoplasma capsulatum is an environmental fungus found commonly in the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys in the United States, Central and South America, and Asia [1, 2]. Risk factors for infection include living or traveling to an endemic area, exposure to aerosolized soil that contains spores, and exposure to bats or birds and their droppings. Patients infected with histoplasmosis can have a wide range of clinical presentations. Many patients are asymptomatic or have a subclinical disease that resolves spontaneously. However, immunocompromised individuals, including HIV/AIDS patients, solid-organ transplant recipients, bone marrow transplant recipients, patients receiving tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors, and patients with cellular immune dysfunction are at increased risk for disseminated infection [3]. Miliary histoplasmosis is a rare clinical manifestation that may mimic miliary tuberculosis and diagnosis may be delayed if a broad differential is not considered in patients undergoing workup for miliary pulmonary nodules.
A 52-year-old man with a history of RA presented to the emergency department with a one-week history of fevers, chills, headache, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. He also reported having a nonproductive cough, fatigue, and one month of night sweats.
His therapy for RA comprised weekly methotrexate, daily hydroxychloroquine, and sulfasalazine. His symptoms were well-controlled on this regimen. He also gave a history of receipt of rituximab for a year prior to presentation.
Our patient is originally from Mexico but has lived in the United States for over forty years. Prior to moving to Colorado, he gave a history of residence in Ohio. He works as a truck driver and his route involves the Midwest states. He also gave a history of travel to California nearly a year ago. About one month before admission, he unloaded his truck in Kansas City during a rainstorm and shortly thereafter began having night sweats and a nonproductive cough. No known history of exposure to tuberculosis.
On admission, he was afebrile but was found to have an oxygen saturation of 85% on room air and required 2-3 liters/minute of supplemental oxygen. Initial laboratory studies revealed a normal white blood cell count. Liver enzymes were elevated above his baseline (AST 74?U/L, ALT 60?U/L, and alkaline phosphatase 170?U/L). An abdominal ultrasound showed mild hepatosplenomegaly, and a chest X-ray showed a diffuse reticulonodular density with hilar lymphadenopathy. He received one dose of intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone and azithromycin and was started on empiric treatment with IV ceftriaxone, doxycycline, and metronidazole for community-acquired pneumonia. Additional negative studies included a respiratory viral PCR, Histoplasma urine antigen, Streptococcus pneumoniae urine antigen, Legionella urine antigen, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 4th generation antibody/antigen assay, acute hepatitis panel, serum herpes simplex virus (HSV) PCR, serum cytomegalovirus (CMV PCR), Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) quantiferon gold, and sputum Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) direct fluorescent antibody (DFA). Rheumatology recommended continuing hydroxychloroquine and stopping methotrexate and sulfasalazine in the setting of possible infection.
A CT chest interstitial lung disease (ILD) showed diffuse micronodularity in all five pulmonary lobes in a perilymphatic and centrilobular distribution and few scattered calcified granulomas that suggested disseminated infection. The CT chest scan also showed mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy as well as splenomegaly (Figure 1). Diffuse micronodules had not been seen on previous CT chest scans six years prior and one month prior to presentation. His imaging findings suggested a miliary pattern. This combined with his clinical symptoms and environmental exposure history was concerning for an invasive fungal infection or tuberculosis (TB). Three sputum AFB cultures were collected and were smear negative. An MTB complex nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) was performed on one of his AFB sputum samples and was not detectable.We describe a case of a male with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) on immunosuppressing medications who presented with fevers and shortness of breath and was found to have miliary histoplasmosis. In immunocompromised patients, diagnosis and management of histoplasmosis may be more challenging. Serum and urine Histoplasma capsulatum antigens may be negative even in the setting of active infection, and there is limited data on the duration of treatment for patients who remain immunocompromised.
He underwent bronchoscopy and findings were notable for endobronchial nodules and plaques in the left upper lobe. Multiple biopsies were done and sent for standard aerobic, AFB and fungal cultures. An Aspergillus galactomannan antigen and PJP DFA in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL) were negative. Since all cultures remained negative, his antibiotics were stopped after 3 days. Infectious Diseases was consulted and recommended starting empiric anidulafungin and posaconazole combination therapy given concern for a fungal infection. Empiric combination therapy with an azole?+?echinocandin was chosen to cover possible endemic fungi and invasive aspergillosis. Posaconazole was chosen over voriconazole for the addition of Mucorales coverage. Assays for serum Histoplasma antigen enzyme immunoassay (EIA), urine Histoplasma galactomannan antigen quantitative EIA, serum Aspergillus galactomannan antigen, and serum Cryptococcus neoformans/gattii antigen were negative. T-SPOT interferon-gamma release assay was negative. Aspergillus fumigatus IgG was elevated at 13.03?U/mL. Pathology from bronchoscopy biopsy showed necrotizing granulomatous inflammation suggestive of infectious etiology. Acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and Grocott-Gomori methenamine silver (GMS) stains were negative. Periodic acid每 Schiff (PAS) stain and hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain were not done. Five days after bronchoscopy, Coccidioides antibody by complement fixation (CF) assay returned positive at 1?:?8, Coccidioides IgM by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was positive, and Coccidioides IgG by ELISA was negative. Coccidioides immitis antibody by immunodiffusion (ID) demonstrated a partial identity reaction indicating the presence of two different types of antibodies. One antibody was identical to the positive control, and the other antibody was unrelated and could be a cross-reactive antibody due to infection with other systemic fungi. His Coccidioides immitis antibody was repeated three days later and was reported as detectable. This pattern of serological data suggested active coccidioidomycosis. He was started on liposomal amphotericin B. Posaconazole and anidulafungin were discontinued. After one week of liposomal amphotericin B treatment, he was transitioned to oral fluconazole 400?mg daily. His hypoxia resolved, and he was discharged home.
Nine days after discharge, our microbiology lab reported growth of mold from fungal lung tissue cultures. The isolate was preliminarily identified as Histoplasma capsulatum based on morphology (Figure 2) and was sent to a reference laboratory where it tested positive for Histoplasma capsulatum by DNA probe. A Histoplasma capsulatum DNA probe sent from his left upper lobe tissue culture was positive. On follow-up visit in the Infectious Diseases clinic, he was switched from fluconazole to itraconazole for the treatment of pulmonary histoplasmosis. A repeat chest CT showed improvement in the size and number of bilateral lung micronodules. One month after discharge, he reported resolution of shortness of breath. However, he described worsening of pain from RA in his shoulders, knees, wrists, and ankles. He was restarted on sulfasalazine and methotrexate after he had been on treatment for histoplasmosis for more than two months. Approximately eight months after presentation, his CT imaging continued to display multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules. Histoplasma antibodies by CF were checked and were negative (<1?:?8). He has been continued on his oral itraconazole treatment with plans to treat for at least one year.
Miliary nodules are diffuse lung micronodules that resemble millet seeds on chest imaging [4]. They can occur in the setting of ineffective cellular defenses and hematogenous dissemination of diseases [5]. Both infectious and noninfectious causes should be in the differential diagnosis of miliary nodules. Noninfectious causes include sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, pneumoconiosis, and metastatic cancer [5, 6]. Miliary tuberculosis is commonly associated with miliary pneumonia. Cases of miliary Nocardia, Mycoplasma, Blastomyces [7, 8], Coccidioides [9], Cryptococcus [10], and Pneumocystis jirovecii [11] have been reported.
Miliary histoplasmosis is a rare clinical presentation that can mimic tuberculosis. It should be considered when working up patients with miliary nodules of an infectious etiology. Only a few cases of miliary histoplasmosis have been described in the literature. A comparison of our case to other cases of miliary histoplasmosis is summarized in Table 1 [12每15].
Histoplasmosis infections can originate from acute de novo infections or following activation of clinically latent infections. Our patient previously lived in Ohio and had traveled to Kansas City shortly before his illness, and both locations are endemic areas where he may have acquired acute histoplasmosis. He was at higher risk for developing the infection as he was immunocompromised and on immunosuppressants for his RA. The other listed cases of miliary histoplasmosis that are listed in Table 1 involved young individuals who were not immunocompromised except for one patient with HIV [15].
Our patient was previously on etanercept, a TNF inhibitor, and rituximab for his rheumatoid arthritis but had not taken either medication for over a year. At the time of diagnosis, he was taking methotrexate, a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD). Histoplasmosis is known to occur in patients with rheumatoid arthritis on DMARD therapies. In a 2011 review by Olson et al., 26 patients with rheumatoid arthritis who were seen at the Mayo Clinic were diagnosed with histoplasmosis, and the most common DMARD used was methotrexate [16].
He presented with symptoms of fever, cough, and night sweats similar to other patients with miliary histoplasmosis. In all the cases, imaging showed miliary shadows or diffuse micronodules consistent with a miliary pattern. Many patients were initially diagnosed with miliary tuberculosis, and some were started on empiric antituberculosis medications, including a patient who was clinically deteriorating [13]. Our patient was not started on antituberculosis medications while undergoing workup as he remained clinically stable. Unlike the other patients, he was initially diagnosed with miliary coccidioidomycosis based on positive coccidioidomycosis serologies and negative urine and serum Histoplasma antigens.
Histoplasmosis may be challenging to diagnose in immunocompromised patients. Diagnosis can be made by visualization of yeast on histopathology, isolation of the organism in culture, or detection of histoplasmosis antigens in body fluids [2]. Histopathology and culture are the gold standards for diagnosis. Histoplasma capsulatum can take at least 4 weeks to be detected in cultures, and DNA probes may be used to assist with diagnosis [2]. Our patient had tissue cultures from the left upper lobe which grew Histoplasma capsulatum after 3 weeks. His diagnosis of histoplasmosis was confirmed by a positive DNA probe sent from tissue culture. Pathology from his left upper lobe biopsy showed granulomatous inflammation which may be seen in H. capsulatum infection [2].
Antigen testing is noninvasive, and combining serum and urine antigen testing can increase sensitivity. The sensitivity of the antigen test is higher in more severe or disseminated infections [3, 17]. Serology may also help to make the diagnosis, but it may not be reliable in patients who cannot produce antibodies due to immune defects [3]. Our patient had negative Histoplasma antibodies by CF, and urine and serum Histoplasma antigens were measured and were negative despite tissue cultures growing Histoplasma. A 2011 multicenter study evaluated the sensitivity of serum and urine antigen assays in 218 patients with histoplasmosis. In immunocompromised patients with pulmonary histoplasmosis, the urine antigen test was positive in only 50% of patients [17]. In the report by Olson et al., only 13 of 24 patients diagnosed with histoplasmosis had positive urine antigens [16].
There is cross-reactivity of the Histoplasma antigen test with antigens from other endemic mycoses including Blastomyces dermatitidis, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, Coccidioides immitis, and Coccidioides posadasii [18]. Cross-reactivity can occur with CF and ID assays in the setting of other fungal infections [18]. Kuberski et al. reviewed 19 cases of patients diagnosed with coccidiodomycosis who also underwent Histoplasma antigen testing. Histoplasma urinary antigen was positive in 11 (58%) of patients suggesting cross-reactivity between the two fungi [19]. Our patient had a positive Coccidioides immitis complement fixation and Coccidioides IgM. It was initially thought that the patient was infected with Coccidioides. However, the clinical course was more consistent with histoplasmosis, especially since his tissue culture grew Histoplasma capsulatum, and Coccidioides was not isolated in culture. Interestingly, his initial Coccidioides immitis antibody by ID demonstrated a partial identity reaction indicating two different types of antibodies were present. It is possible that one of the antibodies was due to cross-reactivity in the setting of histoplasmosis.
There are no randomized controlled studies that establish the optimal duration of treatment for pulmonary miliary histoplasmosis. Relapse of histoplasmosis after treatment is a valid concern, especially in immunocompromised patients. Studies assessing optimal treatment duration of histoplasmosis in immunocompromised patients have been limited to AIDS patients, solid-organ transplant recipients, and bone marrow transplant recipients. A 2014 multicenter retrospective cohort study by Myint et al. evaluated the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) guideline recommendations on when to discontinue antifungal therapy in patients with AIDS and histoplasmosis. The study concluded that antifungal therapy could be discontinued in patients who were adherent to therapy and completed at least 1 year of antifungal treatment, had a CD4 count >150?cells/mL, HIV RNA <400?copies/mL, Histoplasma urine antigen <2?ng/mL, and no CNS involvement [20]. However, our patient＊s clinical characteristics are different from those previously studied since our patient has rheumatoid arthritis that requires chronic immunosuppression. In patients with progressive disseminated histoplasmosis who remain immunocompromised, it is suggested to treat indefinitely [1]. In a 2017 review of histoplasmosis in transplant recipients, it was recommended that patients with posttransplant histoplasmosis complete at least 12 months of therapy, show clinical resolution of signs and symptoms of infection, and have a urine and serum Histoplasma antigen <2?ng/mL before discontinuing therapy [21]. After discontinuing therapy, patients should be monitored for clinical signs of infection and have Histoplasma antigens measured every three months. In our patient, monitoring of Histoplasma antigens may be difficult to interpret as he had both a negative serum and urine Histoplasma antigen in the presence of active infection.
Although miliary infiltrates can be seen in disseminated histoplasmosis, our patient did not have other clinical manifestations to suggest he had disseminated disease. The patient was treated as a pulmonary histoplasmosis case with 1 week of amphotericin B with plans to complete at least one year of itraconazole. There are no definitive guidelines on when immunosuppressants should be restarted. For our patient, he was restarted on rheumatoid arthritis medications after completing 2 months of itraconazole.
This case highlights the challenges of diagnosing and managing miliary histoplasmosis in an immunocompromised patient. Pulmonary nodules in a miliary pattern can be seen in the setting of infections other than tuberculosis, and therefore other infectious possibilities should be considered in patients with miliary pulmonary nodules. Possible clinical presentations can resemble tuberculosis, and histoplasmosis should be considered in patients who appear to have tuberculosis, and mycobacteria cannot be isolated. There can be an absence of antigenemia and antigenuria in immunocompromised patients with histoplasmosis, and therefore histopathology and cultures remain the gold standards for making a definitive diagnosis. Our case also highlights the need for further studies to determine the optimal duration of histoplasmosis treatment in immunocompromised patients and to establish the shortest duration of antifungal therapy required for the safe reinstitution of immunosuppressants.
A Woman with Black Beads in Her Stomach: Severe Gastric Ulceration Caused by Yttrium-90 Radioembolization
Radioembolization (RE) is a selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) delivering targeted, high-dose, intra-arterial radiation directly to the vascular supply of liver tumors. Complications can occur due to aberrant deposition or migration of radiation microspheres into nontarget locations, including normal hepatic parenchyma, lungs, pancreas, and upper gastrointestinal (UGI) tract. We report a case of gastric ulcers due to yttrium-90 (90Y) seed migration to the stomach to alert clinicians to this rare cause of gastric injury. A 57-year-old woman with stage IV breast cancer with liver and lung metastases presented to the hospital with 2 months of worsening nausea and vomiting. Two months prior, she had received SIRT with 90Y microspheres without complications. Upper GI endoscopy showed diffuse gastritis and extensive antral ulceration. Biopsies revealed black, spherical foreign bodies, consistent with 90Y microspheres, documenting radiation injury. Radiation-induced UGI ulceration is caused by direct radiation injury from beta-radiation. Delay in diagnosis may be due to the nonspecificity of symptoms and temporal delay of symptom onset from SIRT, which was 2 months in our patient. Also, complaints may be attributed erroneously to adjuvant chemotherapy or widespread metastatic disease. Clinicians must consider radiation-associated toxicity in any SIRT-treated patient developing abdominal symptoms.
Radioembolization (RE) is a selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) technique which delivers targeted, precise, high-dose, intra-arterial radiation directly to the vascular supply of liver tumors [1]. A common SIRT protocol uses beta-emitting yttrium-90 (90Y) microspheres, infused by intra-arterial catheters via the hepatic arteries. The procedure＊s rationale is that primary and metastatic liver tumors are vascularized by arterial blood flow, whereas normal hepatocytes obtain their blood supply from the portal venous network. The procedure aims to spare normal, contiguous hepatic parenchyma, and adjacent viscera [2, 3].
However, complications can occur, predominantly due to aberrant deposition or migration of radiation microspheres into unintended nontarget locations, including normal hepatic parenchyma, lungs, pancreas, and upper gastrointestinal (UGI) tract [4]. We report a case of diffuse gastric ulceration due to radioactive yttrium seed migration to the stomach to alert clinicians to this exceptional cause of gastric injury and to the diagnostic difficulties of this underappreciated and potentially catastrophic complication of hepatic SIRT.
A 57-year-old woman with stage IV breast cancer with liver and lung metastases presented to the hospital with 2 months of worsening intermittent nausea and vomiting. Two months prior, she had received SIRT with 90Y resin microspheres. Successful hepatic arterial mapping was done for the planned 90Y SIRT. Prophylactic gastroduodenal and right gastric arterial coil embolization were performed without complication. Preliminary scintigraphy was performed through a hepatic artery catheter with Technetium-99m Macroaggregated Albumin (99mTc-MAA). The scan revealed minimal activity in the lungs (7%) with 93% of measured activity in the liver. Yttrium-90 radioembolization of the right and medial segment of the left hepatic lobes was performed without complication. Posttreatment imaging with bremsstrahlung SPECT demonstrated heterogeneous activity in the liver. No significant activity was seen outside the liver including no gastric uptake of microspheres. At the time of SIRT treatment, the patient also had chemotherapy with 5-FU, gemcitabine, cyclophosphamide, and trastuzumab. The patient reported a hospitalization at another institution 4 weeks after SIRT for nausea and vomiting, which were treated symptomatically.
On examination at the current hospitalization, vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 94/51?mmHg (sitting); heart rate, 71/min; O2 saturation, 95% on room air; respirations, 20/min; and temperature, 36.6∼C (97.9∼F). Mucous membranes were dry. Her abdominal exam was without tenderness, organomegaly, or masses. Rectal exam was negative for macroscopic and occult blood. Laboratory data (with normal values in parentheses) revealed a white blood cell count of 5.1 (4.5每11?℅?109/L); hemoglobin of 14.4 (12每15.5?g/dl); mean corpuscular volume of 86 (80每96?fL/red cell); platelet count of 158,000 (150,000每450,000/mm3); blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 17; creatinine (Cr) of 0.7 (BUN 6每20?mg/dL; Cr 0.6每1.2?mg/dL); AST of 48 (5每40?U/L); ALT of 35 (7每56?U/L); alkaline phosphatase of 215 (30每120?U/L); total bilirubin of 1.1 (0.2每1.2?mg/dL); albumin of 3.1 (3.5每5.5?g/dL); lipase of 68 (0每160?U/L); and CA 27每29 tumor marker of 599 (normal?<?38?U/ml). CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis without contrast showed diffuse gastric antral thickening. UGI endoscopy showed diffuse, severe gastritis and extensive antral ulceration (Figure 1). Maroon blood and superficial duodenal bulb ulcerations were also present; biopsies were taken. On histologic examination, black, spherical foreign bodies consistent with yttrium microspheres were visualized, documenting radiation-induced gastric ulceration. (Figures 2(a) and 2(b)). Biopsies were negative for Helicobacter pylori. She received a pantoprazole drip and symptomatic treatment for 72 hours. Since symptoms persisted and her oral intake was insufficient, a jejunostomy tube was placed on the 8th hospital day and enteral nutrition begun. She also received oral steroids. Symptoms improved. She was discharged on the 25th hospital day on a steroid taper, liquid hydromorphone, lorazepam, ondansetron, and pantoprazole.
After discharge, her symptoms did not resolve completely. Repeat UGI endoscopy revealed hemorrhagic gastritis and multiple nonbleeding, gastric antral ulcers with clean bases. Gastric biopsy showed focal gastritis with an inflammatory reaction and degenerative connective tissue consistent with radiation injury. Biopsies of the ulcers were negative for Helicobacter pylori. The patient was placed on iron supplementation therapy and pantoprazole. Repeat endoscopy 6 weeks later revealed healing of gastric ulcers.
In selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT), resin microspheres 25每45?米m in size impregnated with radioactive 90Y are directly infused into the hepatic arterial circulation [5]. The microspheres become trapped in the tumor microcirculation, releasing targeted beta-radiation [5]. Optimal vascular flow and oxygenation are important in achieving the desired brachytherapy effects and avoiding complications. The average penetration of beta-radiation is 2.5?mm and a maximum of 11?mm of surrounding hepatic parenchyma when used to treat hepatic metastases [4]. The half-life of 90Y is 64 hours, with 95% of the dose delivered by day 11 [4]. The tumoricidal effect of radioembolization is predominantly due to radioactivity rather than an ischemia-induced effect [6]. Targeted radioembolization produces shrinkage of tumor size in hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer, in as many as 79% to 91% of patients [4]. Comparable tumor shrinkage has been reported in other metastatic liver malignancies.
Yttrium-90 microspheres can cause tissue damage due to aberrant dissemination of radioactivity to nontarget parts of the GI tract or normal hepatic tissue (Figure 3). The reported incidence of GI complications after SIRT for hepatic neoplasia varies widely [7]. Procedure-related morbidity is as low as 5% with strict adherence to contemporary protocols [8]. As in our patient, radiation-induced gastric or duodenal ulceration is caused predominantly by direct mucosal radiation injury from pure beta-radiation. Additionally, mechanical occlusion of arterioles by the 30?米m microspheres can contribute to ischemic injury [1]. The finding that ulcerations typically do not occur after transarterial chemoembolization or when nonradioactive microspheres are injected into the hepatic arteries of experimental animals supports the hypothesis that radiation injury, rather than ischemia, is responsible for these mucosal ulcerations [6].
Gastroduodenal ulceration from nontarget seed distribution to unintended viscera can occur due to variations in hepatic artery anatomy, collateral vessels, or changes in flow dynamics during infusion [8]. A recent root cause analysis indicated that stasis during injection was the strongest independent risk factor for gastroduodenal complications [9]. Knowledge of the hepatic arterial network and its variations is required to identify hepaticoenteric or collateral splanchnic arterial circulation. Pretreatment assessment with digital subtraction angiography and nuclear scintigraphy helps direct specific treatment protocols and minimizes nontarget embolization of radiation [3, 4]. Coil embolization treatment of communicating vessels can be performed if indicated. However, despite meticulous evaluation, these techniques occasionally do not detect small vessels perfusing structures other than the targeted, malignant hepatic tumor. After 90Y radioembolization, evaluation of extrahepatic activity and liver dosimetry was performed for our patient by 90Y bremsstrahlung SPECT images. However, this technique may have low resolution, which may be another reason for failure to detect sphere distribution in the stomach [10]. As such, some studies have suggested 90Y PET as a more accurate method for postprocedure imaging [10, 11].
Typically, as in our patient, the development of ulceration is delayed and has a longer time course than the short half-life of radiotherapy. At times, additional stressors to the gastric mucosa such a toxins, infections, and mechanical trauma may render the stomach more vulnerable to delayed mucosal ulceration. This may impair ulcer healing and may cause scar or adhesion formation [6]. Prior radiotherapy may also inhibit the inherent ability of the mucosa to repair, resulting in a diminished capacity to heal and recover from repeated radiation treatments. Unlike gastric ulcers due to other etiologies that develop at the mucosal surface, 90Y-induced ulcers originate from the serosal surface [6].
Delay in diagnosis of gastroduodenal ulcers due to SIRT is common, due to diverse reasons. First, nonspecificity of symptoms such as abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting mimic more common abdominal or systemic disorders. These symptoms may be vague, insidious, and nonspecific and, thus, attributed erroneously to adjuvant chemotherapy, widespread metastatic disease, or preexisting or new-onset gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), thus posing a challenge to timely diagnosis. Second, temporal delay of symptom onset from the time of SIRT administration, as in our patient＊s two-month delay in symptom onset, lowers the index of suspicion to link these two events. Clinicians must consider radiation-associated toxicity in any SIRT-treated patient developing abdominal symptoms.
Clinicians should also be familiar with the diverse spectrum of multiorgan, acute, and delayed abdominal adverse events after targeted radioembolization to facilitate timely diagnosis and treatment. In addition to the aforementioned symptoms, this treatment can rarely result in cholecystitis, hepatic abscess, decompensation, and liver failure [12]. A postradioembolization syndrome (PRS) can occur, marked by fatigue, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain of varied severity. Postradioembolization syndrome is common, with reported incidences range from 20 to 70% [1, 6]. In our patient, symptoms of radiation-induced ulceration were delayed, appearing 2 months after the therapeutic procedure.
An important methodological issue in assessing SIRT-related morbidity is that many relevant reports are of single cases or small case series of varying quality and subject to reporting bias. Also, scrupulous adherence to established contemporary protocols associated with a decreased complication rate is not uniformly followed.
Physicians treating patients who have received radioembolization therapy should be familiar with the spectrum of complications and have heightened suspicion for the sometimes delayed, nonspecific adverse effects. Clinicians must consider radiation-associated toxicity in any SIRT-treated patient developing abdominal symptoms.
Antenatal Spontaneous Renal Forniceal Rupture Presenting as an Acute Abdomen
Renal forniceal rupture is a lesser-known cause of acute abdomen in pregnancy. The ureteral compression by the gravid uterus places pregnant women at a higher risk. Sequelae in pregnancy could include intractable pain, acute kidney injury, and preterm birth. Case. A 22-year-old primigravida with no prior medical history presented with an acute abdomen in her second trimester. The diagnosis of renal forniceal rupture was made by a radiologist using MRI. A percutaneous nephrostomy catheter was placed, and the patient＊s pain was relieved. She subsequently delivered at term. Conclusion. Upon presentation of an acute abdomen in pregnancy, providers may not include renal forniceal rupture in their differential as readily as obstetric or gynecologic causes, resulting in delayed diagnosis, unnecessary invasive interventions, and potentially adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes. Increasing provider awareness could result in improved outcomes.
Renal forniceal rupture is the extravasation of urine from one or more renal calyces caused by increased pressure in the renal collecting system [1]. The increase in pressure is secondary to obstruction, most commonly caused by nephrolithiasis. It can also be secondary to malignancy, infectious etiology, iatrogenic injury, and least commonly, pregnancy [2]. A patient may present with nondiscrete flank pain or even mimic someone with an acute surgical abdomen. Lack of provider awareness of the diagnosis has led to unnecessary open surgery [3]. In addition, untreated or undertreated forniceal rupture has been associated with preterm birth and acute kidney injury requiring hemodialysis [4每6]. The documented cases of preterm birth associated with this condition followed spontaneous preterm labor or was the result of emergent cesarean for nonreassuring fetal status. The formulation of a broad differential including conditions outside of obstetrics or gynecology is critical for providers when presented with an acute abdomen in pregnancy. We present a case of renal forniceal rupture presenting in this manner to highlight a condition where provider familiarity may be low and diligence in diagnosis is required, particularly in settings without availability of immediate radiologic diagnosis or expeditious surgical intervention.
A 25-year-old primigravida with no significant past medical history at 22 weeks and 0 days gestation presented to a local hospital with sudden onset of right-sided back pain radiating to her right lower quadrant that had persisted for less than one day. She denied nausea, vomiting, fevers, vaginal bleeding, and dysuria. Her pregnancy had been otherwise uncomplicated. Her pain became uncontrollable with intravenous medication and localized solely to her right lower quadrant. She was transferred to a tertiary care center for further management, given concern for appendicitis and possible need for surgical intervention.
Her pain worsened on transport, and on arrival to the tertiary care center, she demonstrated severe right lower quadrant tenderness with rebound and voluntary guarding without costovertebral angle tenderness. She was hemodynamically stable, but intravenous hydromorphone only provided transient and mild improvement in her pain. Her cervix was found to be closed on digital exam, and no abnormalities were noted on speculum exam. Initial laboratory evaluation demonstrated a normal comprehensive metabolic panel and coagulation studies. Hemoglobin was 10.7?gm/dL and white blood cell count was not elevated (9.9?℅?103/L). Urinalysis was negative.
She underwent an abdominal MRI showing a normal appendix. However, in a verbal read from the on-call radiologist, concern was communicated for right forniceal rupture given the constellation of radiologic findings of hydroureter combined with perinephric and retroperitoneal fluid, highlighted in Figure 1. Her left kidney and collecting system were normal in appearance. Renal ultrasound was therefore performed, and it revealed right ureteral tapering between the gravid uterus and right iliac artery with no right ureteral jet visualized. Given these findings, the patient was subsequently managed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of maternal-fetal medicine, urology, and interventional radiology. Three strategies were discussed and included conservative management with close follow-up, placement of a ureteral stent, and placement of a percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) tube. Patient preference was for PCN placement. Of note, urine culture collected prior to PCN placement was negative.
Following its placement by interventional radiology, her pain was relieved, and she was discharged with follow-up with maternal-fetal medicine and interventional radiology. Her pregnancy was subsequently complicated by readmission for recurrent pain and pyelonephritis with culture isolation of Enterobacter cloacae resistant to both nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). She required placement of a midline IV for daily infusion of ertapenem at her local hospital. Her pregnancy was also complicated by fetal growth restriction, diagnosed at 35 weeks. Uncomplicated vaginal delivery occurred at 37 weeks and 1 day. Her PCN was removed postpartum at which point antibiotics were also discontinued.
The diagnosis of renal forniceal rupture in pregnancy is not straightforward. While flank pain or costovertebral angle tenderness may prompt this consideration in the nonpregnant patient, an acute abdomen in a pregnant patient may not. The physiology of pregnancy often obscures diagnoses that are otherwise readily made. A gravid uterus displacing the appendix may result in an atypical presentation of appendicitis. Similarly, the physiologic dilation of the ureters described above can both predispose to this condition, and knowledge of this physiology can complicate radiologic interpretation. Provider awareness and diligence in creating an exhaustive differential, obtaining appropriate imaging in the stable patient as outlined below, and contacting appropriate teams for treatment can prevent unnecessary procedures and adverse outcomes in the pregnant patient with forniceal rupture.
Spontaneous renal forniceal rupture is caused by various etiologies resulting in an increase in pressure. This diagnosis is not exclusive to pregnancy, and in a retrospective review of forniceal rupture, ureteric stones were the cause in 74% of cases. Other causes included malignant (8%) or benign (2%) extrinsic compression, anatomic obstruction (4%), and iatrogenic causes (4%) [2]. While this review included one pregnant patient, another review was performed solely on pregnant patients with forniceal rupture. This review of 15 cases showed structural causes such as vesicoureteral reflux or infectious causes such as pyelonephritis and abscess as the explanation in 5 cases (31%), benign tumors as the cause in 4 cases (25%), and most significantly, no cause other than pregnancy found in 6 cases (38%) [7]. Compression of the ureters by the gravid uterus is the cause for the increase in pressure responsible for rupture. At 20 weeks of gestation, 76% of pregnant patients will demonstrate right-sided hydroureter and 36% left-sided. Anatomical differences in the courses of the ovarian veins are thought to be responsible as the right-sided vessel courses across the ureter to enter the vena cava. In contrast, the left-sided vessel runs in parallel with the ureter and enters the renal vein [8]. Correspondingly, rupture in pregnant patients occurs on the right in 88% of cases [8], whereas rupture in nonpregnant patients is right-sided only 49% of the time [2].
Presentation of an acute abdomen in pregnancy requires prompt and directed evaluation while also ensuring patient stability and fetal reassurance. The differential should be organized into the following etiological categories: obstetric/gynecologic (placental abruption, preterm labor, ectopic or heterotopic pregnancy, ovarian cysts or tumors, pelvic inflammatory disease, and degeneration of fibroid tumors), renal/urologic (nephrolithiasis, pyelonephritis, spontaneous forniceal rupture, and renal malignancy), and gastrointestinal/hepatobiliary (appendicitis, pancreatitis, gallbladder disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and bowel obstruction) [4, 7]. While spontaneous renal forniceal rupture does not invariably present as an acute abdomen, improving provider awareness of this entity can prevent delaying accurate diagnosis. Misdiagnosis has led to previously documented unnecessary invasive interventions and adverse obstetric outcomes. In a case of misdiagnosis, a primigravida patient suspected to have appendicitis underwent an urgent exploratory laparotomy, revealing a normal appendix. Further intraoperative studies were then undertaken and revealed her symptoms to have been caused by forniceal rupture [3]. In a case of delayed diagnosis, a primigravida at 33 weeks presented with threatened preterm labor and flank tenderness with sterile urine. After an unremarkable ultrasound, she was conservatively managed for renal colic, until repeated episodes of pain prompted an MRI showing calyceal rupture and leak. Stent placement was planned by urology, but rapidly progressing preterm labor resulted in delivery 3 hours later [4]. Not enough cases of rupture exist in the literature to draw a conclusion about the correlation between forniceal rupture and preterm birth, but the pathophysiology is plausible with inflammation, tissue injury, and peritoneal irritation from urine resulting in preterm labor. More research is required to determine if forniceal rupture and preterm birth are clinically correlated and if there is an underlying physiologic mechanism.
Management of forniceal rupture is straightforward and requires placement of either a ureteral stent or percutaneous nephrostomy catheter, whereas detecting the diagnosis is arguably more difficult. This is likely secondary to an understandable lack of provider awareness, given that less than 35 cases exist in the literature as recently as 2016 [3]. Additionally, radiologic diagnosis is usually required. Ideal examinations include CT with IV contrast using renal protocol or IV urogram, which are not ideal in pregnancy [1]. MRI or ultrasound has been successfully used in the cases presented [1, 4]. The diagnosis can be made by any one of the following criteria being met: irregularity of a single renal calyx, loss of the ability to discern renal sinus fat, asymmetrically distributed perinephric stranding, and a discreet perinephric fluid collection [2]. Not all centers are equipped to provide this imaging or interpretation, and in these cases, the responsibility for higher suspicion and appropriate triage falls to the provider available.
Congenital Partial Absence of Pericardium: A Mimic of Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy
Congenital absence of pericardium is a rare condition with electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and echocardiographic findings which may mimic those of other cardiac conditions. We present a case of a 19-year-old asymptomatic female with incidental cardiomegaly on chest X-ray and electrocardiographic and echocardiographic changes, which meet the revised task force criteria for definite arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy but subsequently confirmed to have congenital partial absence of pericardium on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging.
A 19-year-old Chinese female student was referred to our institution for abnormal T-wave inversions on the precordial leads of a screening electrocardiogram (ECG) (Figure 1), as well as a chest X-ray (CXR) showing cardiomegaly (Figure 2). These investigations were performed as part of routine preenrollment health screening for a local university course. She had no significant past medical history of note, nor any family history of sudden cardiac death or inheritable cardiac diseases. She had no cardiac symptoms and was physically active.
Physical examination was unremarkable. A repeat ECG showed symmetrical T-wave inversion in leads V1每V4. No epsilon waves were observed. An exercise stress echocardiogram was ordered, which returned negative for inducible myocardial ischemia at 95% maximum predicted heart rate after an exercise duration of 12 minutes (achieving 13.3 METs). However, a baseline echocardiography showed a visually and quantitatively impaired right ventricular function with tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 1.4?cm and tricuspid annulus tissue Doppler S wave of 0.08?m/s. A focal segment of the distal right ventricular free wall appeared to be dyskinetic and outbulging, suggestive of right ventricular aneurysm. Left ventricular ejection fraction was normal at 69% with normal valves and atrial dimensions (Figures 3每6).
In view of the findings suggestive of possible arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. Cardiac MRI without contrast showed right-sided pericardium but no pericardium present over the left heart, with characteristic displacement of the heart into the left hemithorax (Figures 7每9). There was normal right ventricular volumes and function (RVEDVi 86?ml/m2, RVESVi 35?ml/m2, and RVEF 60%) with no regional wall abnormality, specifically no dyskinetic or aneurysmal segment of the right ventricle. There were no structural abnormalities or entrapment of any epicardial coronary vessel at the edges of the defect. The patient was informed of the diagnosis of congenital partial absence of pericardium and discharged from follow-up.
The normal pericardium is an avascular sac consisting of 2 layers: an outer fibrous layer and an inner serosal layer. Serous fluid normally occupies the space between the 2 layers and acts as a lubricant. With its ligamentous attachments, the pericardium stabilizes and maintains the position of the heart in the thorax.
Congenital absence of pericardium is a rare condition with an incidence of less than 1 in 10,000 [1]. Left-sided defects are the most common with a prevalence of 70% of all pericardial defects [2]. Complete bilateral absence of the pericardium makes up 9%, and right-sided defects compromise 17% of all defects [2, 3]. 30每50% of patients with congenital absence of pericardium have other congenital abnormalities, including atrial septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and tetralogy of Fallot [4]. Pericardial defects have also been seen in patients with aortic connective tissue disorders and Marfan syndrome [5, 6].
Congenital absence of pericardium is generally benign but can be confused with other pathologic conditions on basic imaging and screening tools. CXR commonly shows marked levoposition of the cardiac silhouette, loss of the right heart border, prominent pulmonary artery, and lung tissue between the diaphragm and inferior border of the heart [7]. On ECG, there is often poor R-wave progression due to axial rotation of the heart [7], and on echocardiography, there is right ventricular predominance due to the leftward displacement of the heart; as a result, the patient might be falsely labelled as having right ventricular dilatation [8, 9].
Patients with partial pericardial defects can be symptomatic with chest pain noted in one-third of patients [10]. They are also at risk of complications resulting from strangulation of any herniating cardiac structures (left ventricle, left atrium, and left atrial appendage) through the defect [11] and compression of coronary arteries [12], for which they will require surgical correction. Surgical pericardioplasty (Gore-Tex mesh) may be considered for highly symptomatic patients [13]. On the contrary, complete absence of pericardium does not commonly cause complications or symptoms. Patients might experience chest pain secondary to tension from pleuropericardial adhesions, lack of pericardial cushioning, and undue torsion or strain on the great vessels; as without a pericardium, they serve as the only anchor for the heart [2, 14].
In the case of our patient, electrocardiographic T-wave inversions in precordial leads, and the abovementioned echocardiographic findings, raised a suspicion of ARVC. A final diagnosis of partial absence of pericardium was reached by cardiac MRI.
In retrospect, after the diagnosis was reached on cardiac MRI, the chest X-ray of this patient was reviewed and found to be positive for the Snoopy Dog Sign with findings of levoposition of the cardiac silhouette and loss of the right heart border. There was a prominent pulmonary artery, lung tissue noted between the diaphragm and inferior border of the heart, and no right ventricular enlargement to suggest ARVC. The echocardiographic features of right ventricular outbulging and dyskinesia were due to leftward displacement of the heart.
Our patient has definite ARVC going by the revised task force criteria, meeting major criteria for echocardiographic changes and electrocardiogram repolarisation abnormalities. A diagnosis of ARVC implies a lifetime of follow-up, investigations, family screening, and potentially dangerous therapy such as implantable defibrillator. The cardiac MRI enabled the managing clinician to discharge the patient with no follow-up. A patient unfortunate enough to present with these findings in a unit with no cardiac MRI might have been labelled with a diagnosis of ARVC.
This case demonstrates the important role of cardiac MRI in cases with suspected ARVC, as changes on ECG and echocardiography are by no means pathognomonic for this disorder. In fact, other conditions manifesting with right ventricular dilatation may also mimic ARVC. We might have to take a closer look at ARVC registries for patients who have been wrongly included with congenital absence of pericardium.
In conclusion, while congenital absence of pericardium may be rare, this case emphasizes its importance in the differential diagnosis when evaluating electrocardiographic and echocardiographic changes suggestive of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
Gastric Schwannoma: A Case Report and Review of the Literature for Gastric Submucosal Masses Distinction
Schwannomas origin from Schwann cells sheath and generally are benign, slow-growing, and asymptomatic neoplasms which frequently appear in the head and neck. Although gastrointestinal schwannoma is really rare, the most affected organ in GI system is the stomach. Gastric schwannoma forms 0.2% of all gastric tumors. This neoplasm is always detected as a submucosal mass, the same as other gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Although these tumors have almost the same presentations, they are completely different at therapeutic options and prognoses. Hence, it is important to distinguish them apart and make an accurate diagnosis to optimize treatment outcomes. Herein, we report a case of 28-year-old woman with frequent vomiting and abdominal pain caused by 5?℅?6?cm schwannoma in the antrum of the stomach. This is a rare case of gastric outlet obstruction due to a massive schwannoma. In addition, all other probable submucosal masses will be discussed at different aspects.
Submucosal tumors (SMTs) include a wide spectrum of benign-to-malignant lesions. SMT employs to define the intramural neoplasms underneath the mucosa. The incidence of SMTs in the whole gastrointestinal (GI) tract is unknown. However, the stomach is frequently the most affected organ [1]. Gastric SMTs are divided into three major categories according to the ultrastructural characteristics and protein marker profiles including myogenic tumors, neurogenic tumors, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) [2]. Theses lesions are usually asymptomatic and incidentally diagnosed during various diagnostic procedures. When the physician encounters such lesions, it is necessary to distinguish them from each other for choosing the appropriate therapeutic option.
In this case report, a 28-year-old woman with a 5?℅?6?cm mass in the antrum of the stomach will be presented. She was complaining of frequent vomiting (sometimes bloody) and abdominal pain. After the surgery, the complaints were relieved and histopathological and immunohistochemistry assessments revealed a gastric schwannoma. In addition, other SMTs, as differential diagnoses, will be discussed at different aspects.
A 28-years-old woman was admitted to our emergency department due to abdominal pain, recurrent vomiting, and hematemesis. The patient had been suffering from abdominal pain for several weeks, and the symptoms gradually have worsened until the time of admission when she had severe anorexia and recurrent vomiting. She did not have any systemic and local complication, and the physical examinations did not reveal anything special. After the admission, the patient underwent diagnostic endoscopic study which showed a 5?cm?℅?6?cm antral submucosal mass with central umbilication. The mass was causing gastric outlet obstruction. Double contrast-enhanced abdominopelvic CT scan was performed and revealed a hypodense mass along the anterior wall of the gastric antrum with subsequent pyloric stenosis and luminal obstruction with gastric dilatation in the body and fundus (Figure 1). Possible GIST was suggested, and the patient was consulted for the surgery. The open surgery for the obstruction relief was done, and subtotal gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy was successfully performed (Figure 2).
Pathological examinations were done, and characteristic histological findings for gastric schwannoma were detected (Figure 3). The tumoral capsule which encompassed wavy spindled cells separated by fibrotic bundles woven together in various directions was observed. In addition, lymphoid aggregations around the capsule were apparent. Surgical margins were free, and 3 reactive lymph nodes were seen. Subsequent immunohistochemical staining was performed, and the tumor cells were negative for CD117, CD34, KI67, actin, chromogranin, and desmin. However, they were positive for S100 protein diffusely at nucleus and cytoplasm. Based on histology and immunohistochemistry findings, the final diagnosis of gastric submucosal schwannoma was considered.
The SMTs are divided into three major categories including myogenic tumors (leiomyomas or leiomyosarcomas), neurogenic tumors (schwannomas, granular cell tumors, and neurofibromas), and GISTs [3].
Gastrointestinal neurogenics derive from different components of nerve fibers, mostly autonomic components of Auerbach＊s plexus [4]. They consist 5% of nonepithelial gastric tumors and are mostly benign with 10% malignant transformation risk [5, 6]. Schwannoma, neurofibroma, and granular cell tumors are their subtypes. Schwannomas consist about 91% of the neurogenic tumors [7]. Neurofibroma is associated with the von Recklinghausen＊s disease. Therefore, the GI tract-related nerve sheath neoplasms mostly are detected at neurofibromatosis patients with apparent systemic manifestations like caf谷 au lait spots. Isolated GI neurofibroma without any associated systemic syndrome is an extremely rare clinical entity and forms 0.1% of all gastric neoplasms and frequently has been discovered in the small intestine [8]. Schwannomas arise from Schwann cells sheath. They are generally benign, slow-growing, and asymptomatic neoplasms which commonly occur in the head and neck. However, the GI involvement is really rare. The most common site for GI schwannomas is the stomach representing 0.2% of all gastric tumors, and malignant transformation risk is low [9每11]. Granular cell tumors (GCTs) are extremely rare neoplasm.
Myogenic tumors include leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas which are rare and can be found anywhere along the GI tract. However, they are more common in the esophagus, stomach, and colon and arise in muscularis mucosae or muscularis propria [12].
GIST is the most common kind of submucosal mesenchymal neoplasms of the GI tract. The incidence of GISTs is 10每20 per million and the stomach is the most common location. Approximately 60% to 70% of GISTs arise in this organ and form 0.1%每3.0% of all GI malignant tumors [13, 14]. GISTs arise from Cajal cells which are the smooth muscles pacemaker cells in the GI tract. KIT gene mutation is the main factor for development of GISTs as 85% cases are positive for this mutation [15, 16]. Therefore, GIST＊s definition, diagnosis, and treatment are dependent on this mutation. Due to remarkable response of GISTs to the imatinib treatment as a molecular inhibitor of c-Kit, its accurate diagnosis from other gastrointestinal SMTs is vital [16].
Gastric SMTs frequently are so small and noninvasive to become symptomatic. According to a report by Perea and Gregory, abdominal pain is the most common symptom. GI bleeding, anemia, epigastric mass, nausea, and vomiting can also occur. Dyspeptic symptoms, anorexia, and epigastric tenderness are among rare symptoms [2, 17]. About 10每30% of GISTs are completely asymptomatic. Usually big GISTs, more than 6?cm in diameter, can cause symptoms, and the most common presentation is abdominal pain and/or GI bleeding [18, 19]. The upper GI bleeding has been named as the most common symptom for symptomatic schwannoma [20, 21].
It is obvious that clinical symptoms are nonspecific, and distinction of gastric submucosal masses with clinical presentation is approximately impossible. The standard procedures for establishing diagnoses in patients with GI tumors are endoscopic mucosal forceps biopsy. However, its false negative rate can be as high as 50%. Therefore, the endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and EUS-guided biopsy (EUS-B) would be helpful as the most accurate procedures for definite diagnosis of GI tumors with negative endoscopic biopsies. EUS shows typical findings for some lesions, but in hypoechoic lesions, such as leiomyomas, GISTs, and schwannomas, EUS findings are not enough and EUS-Bs are needed. Due to deeper location than epithelium, biopsies cannot be taken from the subepithelial lesions by conventional endoscopic methods, and EUS-B should be employed [22, 23].
Also, imaging techniques are needed and computed tomography (CT) is a more common diagnostic tool for these cases. The CT scan presentation of GISTs depends on its size, aggressiveness, and the course of the disease. Primary GISTs are mostly large hypervascular lesions which exhibit as enhancing masses at contrast-enhanced CT scans with heterogeneous presentations due to necrosis, hemorrhage, or cystic degeneration [24, 25]. In comparison with GISTs, gastric schwannomas more frequently exhibit a homogeneous enhancement, exophytic, or mixed growth pattern with cystic degenerations. Due to overlapping properties at imaging, it is impossible to distinguish GIST and leiomyomas from each other with imaging modalities. Therefore, the final diagnosis is established by immunohistochemical examination [26每28]. Gastric neurofibromas at CT scan exhibit hypoattenuated mass lesion with usually well-defined borders. Tumor can be intramural or extramural, and central calcification is probable. Regardless of the origin, it will exhibit heterogeneous enhancement after contrast administration. Hemorrhage or necrosis occur at giant masses and will be detected as low-density component. These changes plus size and attenuation asymmetry can be predictive factors for malignant transformation [29, 30].
Although imaging techniques are helpful, histopathological analyses should be established to confirm the diagnosis [31]. The neurofibroma is usually described as nonencapsulated tumors consisting of Schwann cells, endoneurial fibroblasts, and perineurial-like cells in a context of mucinous matrix with wavy fibrotic collagenous bundles which are surrounded with mast cells infiltrations [32]. GI schwannomas are capsulated tumors consisting of spindle cells with prominent lymphoid aggregations which are characterized by Antoni A and Antoni B areas, and the absence of typical Verocay bodies [33, 34]. 70% of all GISTs contain spindle-shaped cell, and 20% are of epithelioid type at the histopathology. However, they also can be pleomorphic [35]. Leiomyomas, the same as the GIST, are of spindle-shaped cells. Therefore, their distinction just can be confirmed by immunohistochemistry examinations [36].
Immunohistochemical analysis should be done to approve the probable diagnoses in all SMTs. GISTs are mostly considered CD117-positive, generally CD34-positive, actin-positive, and S100-negative [19, 31, 37]. In addition, desmin staining can help for distinction between the GISTs with myogenic tumors. Desmin expression is negative at the GIST and positive for the myogenic tumors, while others are the same [38, 39]. Positive staining for S100 protein and vimentin and negative staining for smooth muscle actin, c-KIT, and CD34 supports the notion that the tumor is neurogenic. There are some evidences that schwannomas have a greater extent of S100 with a diffuse pattern expression in comparison with neurofibromas. It is obvious that relying on expression profile of these markers is not sufficient for distinction of these two subtypes of neurogenic tumors. Therefore, new studies introduce calretinin as a helpful diagnostic marker for neurogenic tumor distinguishing from each other [7].
In our case, the tumor cells were negative for CD117, CD34, and actin while were positive for S100. Therefore, GIST and myogenic tumors were excluded, and histological pattern of lymphoid aggregation plus capsule presence highly suggested schwannoma rather than neurofibroma.
This case was operated due to relief of obstruction symptoms with a probable diagnosis of GIST. In the course of surgery due to the presence of the 5?cm?℅?6?cm mass in the lesser curvature of gastric antrum and to obtain a 2?cm safety margin for the mass resection, subtotal gastrectomy was evitable. The lesser curvature masses resection causes vague nerve eradication and subsequent pylorus dysfunction. Therefore, for the lesser curvature masses, subtotal gastrectomy is the choice plan. In addition, subtotal gastrectomy is the treatment of choice for middle- and distal-third gastric neoplasm [40]. Therefore, the open surgery for subtotal gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy was done. The definitive diagnosis of schwannoma was determined through postoperative pathological assessment.
Subdural Hemorrhage after Scoliosis and Detethering of Cord Surgery
Introduction. Intracranial hypotension may occur when CSF leaks from the subarachnoid space. Formation of intracranial, subdural, and subarachnoid hemorrhage has been observed after significant CSF leak as seen in lumbar puncture or ventricular shunt placement. However, very few cases, referring to these remote complications following spine surgery, have been described in literature. We present a case of a 10-year-old male child operated for idiopathic scoliosis with low-lying conus medullaris who postoperatively developed subdural hemorrhage. Case Report. A case of a 10-year-old male operated for idiopathic scoliosis with low-lying conus medullaris is presented. To correct this, detethering was done at the L3 level, laminectomy was done from L2 to L3 with pedicular screw fixation from T3 to L2, and bone grafting with right costoplasty was done from the 3rd to the 6th ribs. On the 5th day postoperatively, the patient developed convulsions and drowsiness and recovered subsequently by postoperative day 7. Conclusion. We report a rare case of an acute intracranial subdural hemorrhage caused by intracranial hypotension following scoliosis and detethering of cord surgery. This report highlights the potential morbidity associated with CSF leak occurring after this surgery.
Postoperative subdural hemorrhage following scoliosis and detethering of cord surgery is a disastrous complication whose pathogenesis is unclear in most cases. Very few cases have been recorded in the past with this complication.
We present the case of a 10-year-old male operated for idiopathic scoliosis with low-lying conus medullaris. To correct this, detethering was done at the L3 level, laminectomy was done from L2 to L3 with pedicular screw fixation from T3 to L2, and bone grafting with right costoplasty was done from the 3rd to the 6th ribs. On the 5th day postoperatively, the patient developed convulsions and drowsiness and recovered subsequently by postoperative day 7.
A 10-year-old male presented with complaints of deformity and pain in the back. The preoperative roentogram displayed right idiopathic thoracolumbar scoliosis (Figure 1). The patient was moderately built with no significant neurological disorders. His reports showed haemoglobin 10.3?g/dl, ESR 14?mm/hr, and CRP Q 30?mg/l. PFT values were low suggestive of type II respiratory failure. The patient did not give any history of previous head injury, and his preoperative brainstem magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not show any abnormality (Figure 2).
The patient underwent detethering at the L2 level with pedicular screw fixation from T3 to L2 with bone grafting with right costoplasty from the 3rd to the 6th ribs (Figure 3). General anaesthesia was given using Scoline injection (succinylcholine). The patient went into bronchospasm for which theophylline injection and Asthalin injection (salbutamol) were given. An arterial line was put to monitor blood pressure during surgery. He was operated in prone position. Total surgical time was 5 hours with intraoperative blood loss around 1.5 liters. The detethering was performed at the lumbar L2 level, and the dura was repaired. Intraoperatively, there was an arterial bleeder, which led to the fall of BP to 40/20?mmHg because of the rupture of the segmental vessels at T7-T8 of the left side intraoperatively. Hypotension lasted for 5 minutes, which was immediately brought back to normal limits by giving whole blood and colloids. The total CSF loss during the surgery was about 100?ml. Postoperatively, the drain output was 300?ml over 3 days. The patient received 2 units of whole blood and 2 units of packed red cells from the intraoperative period to post-op day 4. Postoperatively, the patient was on a ventilator up to day 7. On post-op day 5, the patient developed convulsions, and CT brain was performed that showed subdural hemorrhage (Figure 4). The neurosurgeon advised conservative management with phenytoin for convulsion. By post-op day 7, the patient recovered completely with no neurological deficit. The patient was discharged 2 weeks after neurosurgery and orthopaedic fitness. The patient was followed up regularly for one year with no other postoperative complications.
Intracranial hypotension associated with subdural hematoma is unusual and can prove to be a devastating complication, but it is a possible complication of any procedure involving the dura. Intracranial hypotension is usually a benign condition; however, it can lead to subdural hemorrhage (SDH) and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) due to laceration of superior cerebral vein or arachnoid granulations [1]. Although the exact mechanism is unknown, it is highly indicative that CSF hypovolemia causes decrease of intracranial pressure, thereby causing enlargement of dural venous sinuses that becomes an important factor in the pathogenesis of subdural hemorrhage. Downward brain displacement resulting from pressure change can lead to transient stretching and occlusion of the previously enlarged venous sinuses and thus dispose the patient to venous tears [2]. This probably is the most likely cause of SDH in our case. There have been few reported cases of acute SDH and SAH after other spinal surgeries. Surgical evacuation of a hematoma was performed in half of these cases. Most of them were associated with an intraoperative dural breach [3每5]. Usually, such tears are readily identified by the surgeons and closed intraoperatively. Sometimes dural tear may go unnoticed or may be prone to rupture later which may result in an occult CSF leak and intracranial hypotension [5每7]. In our case, durotomy done during detethering resulted in significant CSF leak which led to intracranial hypotension, resulting in subdural hemorrhage. Systemic hypotension due to blood loss can lead to intracranial hypotension [8, 9]. In our patient, systemic hypotension due to rupture of segmental vessels may have further exacerbated intracranial hypotension caused by CSF leak, contributing to the subdural hemorrhage.
Hypoparathyroidism Causing Seizures: When Epilepsy Does Not Fit
A 24-year-old man presented to the Chris Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital emergency department with recurrent seizures having previously been diagnosed with epilepsy from age 14. The biochemical investigations and brain imaging were suggestive of seizures secondary to hypocalcemia, and a diagnosis of idiopathic hypoparathyroidism was confirmed. After calcium and vitamin D replacement, the patient recovered well and is seizure free, and off antiepileptic therapy. This case highlights the occurrence of brain calcinosis in idiopathic hypoparathyroidism; the occurrence of acute symptomatic seizures due to provoking factors other than epilepsy; and the importance, in the correct clinical setting, of considering alternative, and sometimes treatable, causes of seizures other than epilepsy.
An adult onset seizure is a scenario often encountered by internists. Patients are often labeled as epileptic and in some cases, appropriate investigations to assess for provoking factors and/or treatable causes are overlooked. This case report highlights such a scenario when a patient with hypocalcemia-associated seizures due to underlying idiopathic hypoparathyroidism (IH) was treated for idiopathic epilepsy for a decade. We consider the entity of acute symptomatic seizures and a reasonable approach to investigating adults with new onset seizures. Furthermore, we highlight hypocalcemia as a cause for seizures and discuss the occurrence of brain calcinosis in IH and the role of brain calcinosis versus hypocalcemia as the aetiology of seizures in these patients.
A 24-year-old man presented to the emergency department with recurrent seizures preceded by a history of perioral and fingertip paresthesia. He was diagnosed with epilepsy at the age of 14 and treated with sodium valproate but denied a full diagnostic workup for seizures. On examination, both Chvostek＊s and Trousseau＊s signs were present. On biochemical investigations, his serum-corrected calcium measured 1.03?mmol/L (2.15每2.5?mmol/L), magnesium 0.72?mmol/L (0.63每1.05?mmol/l), and phosphate 2.57?mmol/L (0.78每1.42?mmol/L), and a total 25-OH vitamin D measured 55.98?nmol/L (deficient <50?nmol/L, insufficient 52.5每72.5?nmol/L, and sufficient >72.5?nmol/L). His serum parathyroid hormone was 0.6?pmol/L (1.6每6.9?pmol/L), despite vitamin D insufficiency, confirming a diagnosis of IH. A computed tomography (CT) brain scan showed calcification of the basal ganglia (Figures 1 and 2) and cerebellum (Figure 3). This patient was initially treated with an intravenous calcium infusion and subsequently started on chronic oral calcium supplementation along with alfacalcidol to maintain a serum calcium level in the low normal range. Sodium valproate was stopped as it was felt that his seizures were likely secondary to the profound hypocalcemia. At the 4-month follow-up visit, he was seizure free.
The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) defines a seizure as a ※transient occurrence of signs and/or symptoms due to abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain§ [1]. Epilepsy is characterized by a history of at least one seizure with a predisposition, due to an alteration in the brain, to generate future seizures and associated neurobiologic, cognitive, psychological, and social disturbances [1].
The terminology used to classify seizure aetiology has been extensively debated [2, 3]. The ILAE recommends a distinction between acute symptomatic seizures, referring to seizures occurring in ※close temporal relationship with an acute central nervous system (CNS) insult, which may be metabolic, toxic, structural, infectious or due to inflammation,§ and unprovoked seizures or epilepsy where no identifiable clinical condition responsible for the seizure is found or the time interval is beyond that estimated for acute symptomatic seizures [4].
In the adult presenting with definite new onset seizures, guidelines suggest initial investigations for any provocative factors that may cause acute symptomatic seizures. Workup should begin with a thorough bedside clinical evaluation and further investigations tailored to the initial clinical findings, for example, neuroimaging in the presence of a suspected structural brain lesion. Due to cost-efficacy and accessibility, CT scan is recommended as the initial imaging modality; however, some abnormalities may be missed by CT, and if concerns still exist for a structural lesion, magnetic resonance imaging is suggested [5, 6]. Evidence for the investigation of biochemical abnormalities or drug intoxication responsible for seizures is conflicting. Studies supporting routine laboratory or radiological testing are biased by being performed in the emergency department where the prevalence of acute symptomatic seizures is high compared to studies done outside the emergency department where the prevalence of biochemical abnormalities ranges from 0 to 15%, but often these abnormalities are not of clinical relevance. As such, it is recommended that the use of laboratory testing be guided by clinical features suggesting a provoking factor, such as in our patient, who complained of a history of perioral and fingertip parethesias, and hence, a serum calcium measurement was appropriate [5, 6]. No studies have examined the use of a lumbar puncture in the work-up of new onset seizures and, once more, this should be guided by the clinical evaluation; in the South African setting, this is a necessary investigation in HIV-positive patients presenting with seizures due to the high risk of CNS infections in this population [5, 6]. Electroencephalography (EEG) should be used in patients where neurological function has not improved within 30每60 minutes after the end of the seizure and in those with a fluctuating level of consciousness or when focal neurological signs are not explained by a structural lesion [5, 6].
The aetiology of acute symptomatic seizures is divided into two groups: neurological insults and systemic diseases. Neurological insults comprise just under half of all cases and include acute stroke (16%), traumatic brain injuries (16%), and CNS infections (15%). Systemic diseases include electrolyte and metabolic disorders (9%); medications, drugs, and toxins (14%); anoxic encephalopathy and limbic encephalitis (5%); and eclampsia (2%) [4, 7]. In sub-Saharan Africa, particular common causes of neurological-related acute symptomatic seizures include the following: CNS infections such as neurocysticercosis, herpes simplex virus encephalitis, HIV-related opportunistic infections, traumatic brain injury, and cerebrovascular accidents [8, 9].
The electrolyte abnormalities associated with seizures include hyper- and hyponatremia, hyper- and hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia. According to the ILAE, to attribute a seizure to an electrolyte abnormality, the biochemical derangement should be detected within 24 hours of the seizure [4, 10]. Hypocalcemic-related seizures depend on the rate of decrease in serum calcium and degree of hypocalcemia [10]. The resultant hypocalcemia results in increased neuronal excitability due to reduced extracellular concentration of calcium rather than depleted intracellular levels and both generalised tonic-clonic or focal motor seizures can occur with hypocalcemia [10, 11].
IH is a well-known cause of hypocalcemia. Acute symptomatic seizures due to electrolyte abnormalities do not have structural brain lesions; however, IH is an exception as brain calcification or calcinosis, which was first described by Eton in 1939, can occur [10, 12, 13]. Despite high rates of brain calcinosis in most patients with IH, between 73% and 93%, the pathogenesis remains unknown. It is postulated that brain calcinosis occurs due to a milieu of poor calcium control and a high calcium-phosphate product, particularly in the cerebrospinal fluid, resulting in calcium deposition predominantly in the periventricular regions [13]. The basal ganglia, in particular the lentiform (putamen and globus pallidus) and caudate nuclei, are the most frequently affected sites although more extensive intracerebral calcification affecting other brain parenchymal structures, as in this patient, may occur [12, 13]. The degree of brain calcification is directly related to the severity and duration of hypocalcemia, with a critical duration of illness exceeding 4 years before the occurrence of calcification and the odds of brain calcinosis increasing by 12% for every year of hypocalcemic symptoms [13].
The clinical presentation of brain calcification is varied and includes the following: seizures, mental deterioration, and movement disorders from cerebellar and extrapyramidal dysfunction [12, 13]. In IH, seizures are a significant predictor of the existence and progression of brain calcinosis, but the odds of epilepsy are only 0.9% suggesting the aetiology for the seizures appears not to be related to the underlying brain calcinosis but rather due to neuronal excitability from low levels of calcium [13]. In an Indian cohort, the prevalence of seizures in IH was 64%, and just below 90% presented with a generalised tonic-clonic seizure, although partial complex seizures did also occur (4.4%) [14]. Basal ganglia calcification is easily seen on CT scan, as in our patient; however, nuclear imaging modalities such as 18F-FDG may also be used to confirm basal ganglia calcification through reduced basal ganglia glucose uptake, which is directly proportional to the degree of basal ganglia calcification [15].
Calcium and vitamin D supplementation is the recommended therapy for IH, although this has not been shown to slow the progression of brain calcinosis. The serum calcium is maintained in the lower range of normal to avoid hypercalciuria and resultant nephrolithiasis [13]. Regarding the management of seizures in IH, antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are used; in an Indian cohort of patients with IH and seizure, most patients only required a single agent (71%) of which phenytoin was most commonly used (46.7%), followed by valproate (40%), carbamazepine (26.7%), and levetiracetam (13.3%) [14]. In this study, AEDs were continued for 2 years after the patient was seizure free and only discontinued when the patient had a normal EEG and an average serum calcium level greater than 1.8?mmol/L for the last three clinic visits [14]. When AEDs were withdrawn, the first drug withdrawn was the first drug started and the dose was reduced by 25% each month [14]. The effect of AEDs on calcium absorption and vitamin D metabolism has concerning effects on calcium homeostasis. In an Indian study, the discontinuation of phenytoin, valproate, and carbamazepine was all associated with increased serum calcium levels, and the effects of AEDs on calcium levels must be taken into account when considering calcium and vitamin D replacement in IH [14].
This case highlights acute symptomatic seizures, which are caused by disease processes other than epilepsy, and highlights the need, in the correct clinical setting, to consider other treatable differential diagnosis for seizures. In this patient, despite a prior diagnosis of epilepsy, he now remains seizure free and off antiepileptic drugs. Furthermore, we highlight the entity of brain calcinosis in hypoparathyroidism, a diagnosis that should be considered when these radiological features are seen on a brain CT scan.
A Large Grade 5 Mobile Aortic Arch Atheromatous Plaque: Cause of Cerebrovascular Accident
Aortic atheromas (aortic atheromatous plaques) are defined by an irregular thickening of the intima ≡2?mm, and a complex plaque is defined as a protruding atheroma ≡4?mm with or without an attached mobile component. Stroke incidence is approximately 25% in patients with mobile plaques of the aortic arch and 2% in patients with quiescent nonmobile plaques. Antiplatelet agents, oral anticoagulants, and statins have been suggested in the management of atheromas. We present an 80-year-old male, with non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and chronic dysarthria, found to have an acute cerebrovascular accident (CVA) secondary to embolism from a large 12?mm aortic arch plaque, treated medically with oral antiplatelet therapy, anticoagulation, and statin therapy.
Aortic atheromas pose a significant risk for CVA due to microembolization. The presence or absence of calcification has a greater impact on embolization risk because the lack of calcification makes atheroma more lipid-laden and thus more prone to ulceration, thrombosis, and rupture [1]. Aortic arch atheroma and plaque complexity are important risk factors for unexplained arterial embolic events such as stroke, transient ischemic attack (TIA), and peripheral emboli [2]. Stroke incidence is around 25% in patients with mobile plaques of the aortic arch, while it is only 2% in patients with quiescent nonmobile plaques [3]. Risk factors independently associated with complex plaque formation are advanced age, history of HTN, hypercholesterolemia, increased BMI, diabetes, and tobacco use [4]. Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) is a safe and relatively less invasive procedure and is the modality of choice for diagnosing an aortic atheroma. This enables a detailed view of the aorta and quantification of atheromatous plaque according to their thickness and presence of mobile components [5每7].
An 80-year-old male with a past medical history of HTN, DM-II, mild vascular dementia, bilateral cerebrovascular accident with no residual weakness, gout, and osteoarthritis presented to the hospital with chest pain and was found to have a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) with a peak troponin of 5.1. The patient also had an episode of slurred speech in the ER for which Neurology was consulted. Upon further investigation, his slurred speech was chronic in nature. Home medications included aspirin 81?mg, allopurinol, amlodipine, pantoprazole, and glipizide. Vital signs on admission revealed a blood pressure of 163/98?mmHg without orthostasis, respiration rate of 19, heart rate of 87 beats per minute, and a temperature of 98.2∼ F. Physical examination revealed no carotid bruits, lungs were clear, no JVD, and cardiovascular examination was unremarkable: normal S1/S2, no murmurs, rubs, or gallops. On neurological examination, the patient was alert and oriented to person, place, and time with mild dysarthria. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) stroke scale score was 1. Cranial nerves II每XII were grossly intact, and stretch reflexes were 2+ throughout. Tactile sensation was intact, and motor function was 5/5 throughout with no cerebral ataxia present. At the time of admission, his electrolytes were within normal limits; however, BUN and Cr were 1.76 and 27 and iron deficiency anemia was present (HB: 11.8, HCT: 37.3, MCV: 88.5, RDW: 17.6, ferritin: 200, iron: 22, TIBC: 220, and transferrin: 176). EKG showed normal sinus rhythm with nonspecific T wave abnormalities. Serum lipids and uric acid were normal in range. CXR was negative for effusion, consolidation, and pneumothorax. The patient was started on heparin drip and was transferred to another facility for cardiac catheterization, which revealed a mid-LAD obstructive lesion, which was treated with a drug-eluting stent. The patient was started on dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin 81?mg and Plavix 75?mg.
CT head without contrast revealed no acute intracranial hemorrhage with encephalomalacia and gliosis in the right frontal and occipital lobes, in keeping with prior infarctions.
MRI brain revealed a small foci of restricted diffusion in the left cerebellum, right periventricular, and left corona radiata consistent with small acute infarcts, likely embolic in origin. There were old cortical infarcts in the right frontal and occipital lobes, with remote lacunar infarcts in the bilateral basal ganglia, thalami, and bilateral cerebellar hemispheres. Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed an ejection fraction (EF) of 55每60% with aortic root and vascular sclerosis. It also revealed mild dilation of the aortic root with a visualized plaque in the transverse aorta. There was evidence of a Grade 5 (mobile or ulcerating) atheroma in the transverse aorta, with a visualized plaque in the descending aorta. There was also evidence of a Grade 4 (>5?mm) atheroma in the descending aorta. A severe mobile atherosclerotic plaque was noted in the aortic arch, which was approximately 12?mm long (Figures 1每4). There was no patent foramen ovale.
The patients＊ family decided against surgical management, and he was eventually discharged on conservative management with aspirin 81?mg, Plavix 75?mg, Lipitor 80?mg, Lopressor, and apixaban 5?mg BID for anticoagulation.
Aortic atheromas can be classified as stable and unstable with unstable being mobile, nonhomogeneous, ulcerated, or spongiform, while stable plaques are calcified, immobile, echo dense homogeneous, and without signs of ulceration. The incidence of an aortic plaque is approximately 45% and can result in an embolism [1]. Aortic atheromas can occur in various regions of the aorta, while in ascending aorta and arch, it is extremely rare. The natural history of aortic atheromas is still unknown and diagnosis is often made only after a thromboembolic event, which can be life threatening [8]. The presence of large plaques in the proximal segment of aorta is a main risk factor of stroke, and studies have shown that it can result in a 2.5- to 4-fold increased risk of stroke [9, 10].
Although many studies have investigated aortic atheromas, the mechanism of thrombus formation remains unclear. Pagni et al. and Lohrmann and Peters investigated the causes of aortic atheromas, and their studies found that the cause may be a hypercoagulable state, deficiency in one or more components of coagulation-anticoagulation system, secondary to underlying lupus, estrogen therapy, heparin immune reaction, or underlying aortic disease [11]. Some authors, however, have reported aortic atheromas without evidence of any of the aforementioned conditions [11, 12]. In our patient, there was no evidence of a hypercoagulable or systemic disorder that would cause unusual thrombosis, but there was an atherosclerotic plaque, which could result in endothelial injury and resulting thrombus formation.
TEE is a safe, noninvasive, and modality of choice for diagnosis, although CT, MRI, and intraoperative epiaortic ultrasonography are known to be complementary examination techniques. TEE was able to find aortic arch atheromatous disease in 55% of patients with a normal chest X-ray, and 91% of those who had heavily calcified aortic knobs [13]. TEE has a sensitivity of 91%, specificity of 82%, and positive and negative predictive values of 72% and 95%, respectively [13, 14]. The Katz classification for grading aortic atheromas is as follows: Grade 1, normal-appearing intima of the aorta; Grade 2, extensive intimal thickening; Grade 3, sessile atheroma protruding?<5??mm into the aorta; Grade 4, atheroma protruding?>5??mm; and Grade 5, mobile atheroma [15].
In our patient, TEE revealed the presence of atherosclerotic plaques with intimal disruption and mobile projections in the aortic arch, while no potential embolic sources were detected in the extracranial carotid or vertebral arteries. We can conclude that the ulcerated plaque with mobile projections were likely responsible for the cerebral emboli found in our patient. In previous studies, it was reported that when atherosclerotic plaques become pedunculated and highly mobile, the incidence of an embolic event is high [16]. In this present case, the atherosclerotic plaques were pedunculated and highly mobile, and we could not find any other cause of cerebral embolism.
Studies have shown that among patients with ischemic stroke who are treated with warfarin or aspirin, large aortic plaques and especially those with complex morphology remained associated with an increased risk of recurrent stroke and death [17]. Regarding antithrombotic therapy, there have been a limited number of randomized control trials which have compared antiplatelet therapy to anticoagulant therapy with mixed results. The Aortic Arch Related Cerebral Hazard (ARCH) trial which randomized patients to aspirin plus clopidogrel or warfarin in patients with an aortic arch plaque?>?4?mm found that ischemic stroke occurred less frequently in the aspirin plus clopidogrel group; however, these results were statistically insignificant [18]. Other studies have found no significant benefit to single antiplatelet therapy over dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin plus clopidogrel [19每21]. The 2014 American Heart Association/American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) guidelines recommend antiplatelet therapy and statin treatment for patients with an ischemic stroke and evidence for an aortic arch atheroma [22]. Currently, the role of surgical intervention to treat patients with aortic plaques is not clearly defined. Although studies with endovascular treatment with angioplasty or stenting have been reported, concerns about destabilizing atheromatous material with catheter manipulation are well founded [23]. Aortic arch atherectomy may be limited to patients who are also undergoing cardiac surgery; however, this is not without an intraoperative risk of stroke [23]. The AHA/ASA recommends against routine surgical endarterectomy of aortic arch plaque for the purposes of secondary stroke prevention [22].
Our patient was discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin plus clopidogrel and apixaban for anticoagulation. Although non-vitamin-K oral anticoagulants have not been extensively studied for secondary ischemic stroke prevention in patients with an aortic atheroma >4?mm; our patient on follow-up did not have any subsequent cerebrovascular events or any episodes of major bleeding.
Atheromas with >4?mm thickness or with plaque rupture and mobile fragments are more likely to be associated with peripheral embolic events. Antithrombotic agents and statins remain the mainstay of treatment, while the role and benefit of surgical intervention are not well established and therefore currently not recommended. The use of non-vitamin-K oral anticoagulants is another avenue for future investigation.
Infectious Aortitis: A Life-Threatening Endovascular Complication of Nontyphoidal Salmonella Bacteremia
A 65-year-old Japanese man living in the United States presented with pyrexia and chills associated with intermittent lower abdominal and back pain for 5 days. He denied recent travel, rash, diarrhea, or rectal bleeding. Physical examination revealed spiking pyrexia, and routine laboratory tests revealed mild leukocytosis and neutrophilia. Abdominal CT with contrast showed findings highly compatible with aortitis. Comprehensive autoimmune evaluation was negative. Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis was isolated from blood cultures. IV antibiotics were administered, but the patient continued to experience low-grade pyrexia and mild leukocytosis, and follow-up abdominal CT showed progressive aortic inflammation. The patient therefore underwent resection of the affected aortic segment with in-situ graft replacement and lifelong suppressive antibiotics. The patient is asymptomatic with no complications at 18 weeks of follow-up. This case report illustrates that patients with infectious aortitis from nontyphoidal Salmonella may (1) present with nonspecific and nonlocalizing symptoms and signs except for sepsis; (2) have diagnostic blood cultures and abdominal CT findings; and (3) typically require aggressive, prolonged IV antibiotic therapy and surgery for potential cure of this life-threatening infection.
A 65-year-old Japanese man with past medical history of hypertension and chronic hepatitis B, and no recent travel history, presented with diffuse body aches, spiking pyrexia, chills, intermittent lower back pain, and abdominal pain unrelated to meals for 5 days. He denied recent diarrhea, rash, or rectal bleeding. Physical examination revealed stable vital signs except temperature?(38.9∼C), no jaundice, soft nontender abdomen, guaiac-negative stools, no localized tenderness over the spine, and no limitation of spine mobility. Laboratory analysis revealed a leukocyte count of 10,100/米L (normal: 3,500每10,100/米L), neutrophil level of 7,400/米L (normal: 1,600每7,200/米L), hemoglobin level of 16.4?g/dL (normal: 13.5每17.0?g/dL), platelet count of 266,000/米L (normal: 150,000每400,000/米L), and serum sodium of 131?mmol/L (normal: 135每145?mmol/L), aspartate aminotransferase of 74?U/L (normal: 10每37?U/L), alanine aminotransferase of 81?U/L (normal: 9每47?U/L), and alkaline phosphatase of 101?U/L (normal: 30每110?U/L), with normal total bilirubin and albumin levels. Serum parameters of renal function were within normal limits. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 107?mm/hr (normal: 0每15?mm/hr), and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 17.4?mg/dL (normal: 0每0.8?mg/dL). He was HIV seronegative, and rapid plasma reagin (RPR) was nonreactive. Comprehensive immunological evaluation was within normal limits, including levels/titers of immunoglobulin G subclasses, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, cyclic citrullinated peptide, myeloperoxidase, proteinase 3 antibodies, and antineutrophylic cytoplasmic antibodies. The patient was given intravenous (IV) ciprofloxacin 400?mg twice daily empirically in the emergency room before admission.
Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast showed inflammatory changes of infrarenal aorta consistent with aortitis. Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis was isolated from multiple blood cultures. The bacterial isolate was susceptible to ampicillin, ceftriaxone, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, but not ciprofloxacin using automated sensitivity testing for 29 antibiotics (NM45, Beckman Coulter Labs., 250 S. Kramer Blvd., Brea, CA 92821).
The antibiotic regimen was switched to IV ceftriaxone 2?g/24?hr, but the patient developed progressive abdominal and back pain and persistent pyrexia and mild leukocytosis. Follow-up abdominal CT one week later showed progressive inflammatory changes around infrarenal aorta extending to common iliac arteries and proximal external and internal iliac arteries, mild mural thickening of proximal abdominal aorta, and development of penetrating intimal ulcers, suggesting progression of aortitis (Figures 1(a)每1(d)). He underwent surgical resection of the infected aortic segment with in-situ aortoiliac rifampin-impregnated Dacron graft supported with bilateral iliac arterial stents. Histopathology of the resected aorta revealed severe neutrophylic infiltration and other inflammatory cells within the arterial wall, without evident bacteria (Figure 2). He was discharged after 1 week of IV ceftriaxone therapy to complete a further 5 week course of IV therapy as an ambulatory patient. The patient＊s CRP and ESR were followed weekly after admission. The CRP declined after 1 week to <0.4?mg/dL and consistently remained at this low level thereafter. The ESR declined progressively by about 20?mm/hr every week until reaching a steady-state level of about 22?mm/hr after 4 weeks. He is asymptomatic at 18-weeks follow-up with planned lifelong antibiotic suppressive therapy with amoxicillin.
Infectious aortitis is a rare, life-threatening, inflammatory process within the aortic wall caused by microorganisms that can lead to aortic aneurysm and rupture [1]. 2.6% of abdominal aortic aneurysms are secondary to infectious aortitis [2]. Any microorganisms, such as bacteria or fungi, can cause infectious aortitis. In the pre-antibiotic era, syphilis and bacterial endocarditis were the most common infectious etiologies. Currently, common infectious organisms include Gram-positive bacteria such as Staphylococcal species, Enterococcus, or Streptococcus or Gram-negative bacteria such as Salmonella. Uncommon organisms in developed countries are Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Treponema pallidum, but the latter organisms are more common in developing countries. Fungi, such as Candida and Aspergillus, can also infect the aorta [3]. In general, healthy aortic intima is highly resistant to infection, and the major risk factor for aortic infection is atherosclerosis. Mechanisms of aortic infection include (1) most commonly, bacterial seeding of atherosclerotic plaques, (2) extension from contiguous infection, (3) penetrating trauma with direct microorganism invasion of aorta, (4) closed trauma with disruption of aortic intima which may facilitate seeding with microorganisms, (5) septic emboli of aortic vasa vasorum, and (6) self-inflicted or iatrogenic vascular manipulation [4, 5].
Salmonella is a Gram-negative, facultative anaerobic, motile, non-lactose-fermenting, and non-spore-forming bacillus [6]. NTS are ubiquitous in nature and infect poultry and reptiles [5]. Salmonella infection can lead to (1) gastroenteritis, (2) enteric fever, (3) bacteremia, (4) extraintestinal focal infection (EFI), (5) chronic carrier state, and (6) occasionally as bacteremia without gastrointestinal involvement that may lead to EFIs [5, 7]. Salmonella aortitis comprises about 40% of all infective aortitis [8, 9]. NTS, especially Salmonella choleraesuis and typhimurium, comprise one-third of abdominal aortic infections [3]. NTS aortitis has a predilection to infect the abdominal aorta, especially infrarenal segment [2]. Bacterial and leukocytic enzymes can further weaken the elastic fibers of the damaged aortic wall leading to aneurysmal formation [3].
Approximately 5% of patients with NTS gastroenteritis develop bacteremia [10]. EFIs of NTS can infect endovascular tissue, bone, brain, meninges, lungs, or abdominal viscera [10]. The incidence of EFI in NTS bacteremia is 40% [7]. Endovascular infection is a life-threatening extraintestinal complication of NTS bacteremia. About 25% of patients >50 years old with NTS bacteremia develop endovascular infections. Risk factors for vascular infection in a study of 358 patients >50 years old with NTS bacteremia included male sex, hypertension, coronary artery disease, and serogroup C1 infections, whereas negative risk factors include malignancy and immunosuppressive therapy [11]. Although immunosuppression predisposes subjects to NTS bacteremia, immunosuppression may counteract formation of endovascular infections [12].
Symptoms are variable, but may include the following: (1) gastroenteritis: diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramps; (2) infectious symptoms: pyrexia, chills, and sweats; (3) aortitis: location of the involved aortic segment determines the type and severity of symptoms: abdominal pain if abdominal aorta is affected; chest, shoulder, or back pain if thoracic aorta is affected; and shock or hemodynamic instability if an aneurysm forms and ruptures; and (4) other symptoms of EFIs: endocarditis, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, cholangitis, meningitis, pneumonia, or other manifestations of visceral organ involvement [2, 10].
Diagnosis of Salmonella aortitis requires a high index of suspicion in the presence of risk factors, NTS bacteremia, and compatible symptoms even in hemodynamically stable patients. Chen et al. [11] reported in 2012 a scoring system for NTS vascular infections (NTSVIs) to help predict the risk of vascular infections in patients with NTS bacteremia. In this scoring system, each of the following is assigned 1 point: male sex, hypertension, coronary artery disease, and serogroup C1 infection; and each of the following is assigned ?1 point: malignancy, and immunosuppression due to negative association with aortitis. Based on this scoring system, the prevalence of vascular infections in patients with 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 points was 2.2%, 10.6%, 39.4%, 55.2%, and 100%, respectively [11, 12].
Supporting data include laboratory studies showing leukocytosis and neutrophilia, elevated markers of inflammation such as ESR or CRP, and positive blood cultures [2, 7]. Pretreatment with antibiotics can lead to absence of microorganisms in the resected aortic specimen, as occurred in this case, and sterile blood cultures [4, 13].
Abdominal CT with IV contrast is the diagnostic study of choice. However, CT can show normal aorta during early aortitis, as it may miss the initial changes in the arterial wall or periaortic tissue [14]. Diagnostic CT findings of aortic inflammation include mural thickening, periaortic soft tissue density, rim enhancement, periaortic gas, periaortic stranding or fluid retention, saccular or fusiform aneurysm, disruption of calcification, and vertebral body erosion [15, 16]. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium enhancement is an emerging imaging technique that may have similar diagnostic potential as CT, but should not be used in patients with implanted devices or unstable patients [4]. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) and invasive aortography are reserved for cases in which the diagnosis of acute aortitis cannot be excluded by noninvasive methods or to confirm the diagnosis. DSA and aortography have the disadvantage of imaging the aortic lumen only without showing adjacent soft tissue or bony involvement. Invasive aortography carries the additional risk of rupture of the fragile aortic wall from increased intraprocedural aortic pressure [4, 15].
NTS aortitis is usually treated by combined medical and surgical therapy. The mortality is 96每100% with medical therapy alone and is 40% with combined medical and surgical therapy [2]. Initial empiric antibiotic therapy for infectious aortitis should generally cover Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, taking into consideration risk factors for multidrug-resistant organisms and/or extended spectrum beta-lactamase-resistant bacteria that may require specific antibiotics (e.g., vancomycin, ceftaroline, daptomycin, linezolid, carbapenem, or newer agents) [17, 18]. When Salmonella aortitis is confirmed, beta-lactam antibiotics (ceftriaxone, piperacillin-tazobactam, or other beta-lactams) are preferred if the bacteria are susceptible to them because some emerging Salmonella strains, especially in Asia, have increasing resistance to ciprofloxacin and other conventional antibiotic therapies [19]. If surgery is not urgently indicated (neither impending aortic rupture nor hemodynamic instability), intravenous an
ibiotics should be administered for 2每4 weeks before surgery to control the local infection to prevent reinfection, especially for in-situ graft placement. Intravenous antibiotics should be extended postoperatively until 6每12 weeks after blood cultures become sterile [2, 13].
The optimal duration of antibiotic therapy remains controversial, with some experts suggesting lifelong suppressive oral antibiotic therapy after IV antibiotics especially for difficult to treat microorganisms or for in-situ graft placement [20]. Long-term suppressive antibiotic therapy with oral agents depends on culture susceptibility, but the data are limited about specific antibiotics, antibiotic dosages, and duration of therapy [21每23]. Most studies of antibiotic therapies included ciprofloxacin, amoxicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole antibiotic agents.
The standard surgical treatment is resection of the infected aortic segment and in-situ or extra-anatomical reconstruction. Theoretically, in-situ graft is more prone to graft reinfection, whereas extra-anatomical graft is more prone to thrombosis [4]. Endovascular aortic repair (EVAR) can be used as a temporary measure to hemodynamically stabilize unstable patients or to seal vascular leaks until the patient undergoes definitive surgery. EVAR has been used as a stand-alone technique to surgically repair mycotic aortic aneurysms and Salmonella aortic aneurysms, but the current data on efficacy are inadequate [3, 4, 10, 23, 24]. Study limitations include this is a single case report, and it is retrospectively reported.
A case is reported of NTS causing aortitis and aneurysmal formation. The patient presented nonspecifically with diffuse body aches, spiking pyrexia, chills, intermittent lower back pain, and abdominal pain unrelated to meals for 5 days, without recent diarrhea, rash, or rectal bleeding. Blood cultures and abdominal CT findings were diagnostic. The patient was successfully treated with prolonged IV antibiotic therapy, segmental aortic resection, and graft repair. This case illustrates the potential elusiveness of this diagnosis.
NTS aortitis is a life-threatening disease associated with up to 100% mortality if inadequately treated. Early diagnosis is crucial to improve outcome. However, the diagnosis can be challenging as blood cultures can be sterile due to prior antibiotic use, CT scan can be normal early in the infection, and other diseases can lead to aortitis. Diagnosis of NTS aortitis requires awareness of risk factors, recognition of symptoms, and a high index of suspicion. CT scan is the imaging modality of choice. Early diagnosis, early use of appropriate antibiotics, and definitive surgical repair may reduce mortality to 40%.
Acute Suppurative Thyroiditis in an Intravenous Drug User with a Preexisting Goiter
Acute suppurative thyroiditis (AST) is an uncommon, potentially life-threatening cause of a rapidly enlarging neck mass. It may present similarly to subacute thyroiditis, a relatively benign and self-limiting condition. We report a case of AST in an adult intravenous (IV) drug user with a preexisting goiter who presented with a left forearm abscess that grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. In this particular case, clinical suspicion for AST was high. As a result, early IV antibiotic therapy was initiated, and this led to rapid clinical improvement furthermore preventing airway compromise. To our knowledge, this is the first case of AST in the literature resulting from likely hematogenous spread in the setting of IV drug use and a preexisting goiter. Overall, this case highlights the importance of assessing risk factors for AST in patients whose presentations may seem more typical of subacute thyroiditis. Such an approach will lead to timely diagnosis and treatment to avoid potentially devastating consequences.
Acute suppurative thyroiditis (AST) is a rare but potentially lethal endocrine condition, representing just 0.1每0.7% of all thyroid disease [1]. The rarity of AST is thought to be influenced by several protective trophic factors and anatomic barriers specific to the thyroid gland, including the presence of iodine, hydrogen peroxide, lymphatic drainage, and a thyroid capsule. These mechanisms have been suggested to provide a shield against the development of thyroid suppuration [2每4].
AST is most commonly encountered in the pediatric and adolescent populations, usually in those with congenital anomalies such as a pyriform sinus fistula [5, 6]. Only 8% of cases occur in adulthood; in many cases, the source of infection is not obvious [2, 7]. It may present similarly to subacute thyroiditis, with painful thyroid swelling, fever, and leukocytosis following an upper respiratory tract infection (URTI). AST exhibits a wide range of illness severity, from complete resolution back to a euthyroid state to a greater than 12% mortality rate if no interventions are initiated [2, 3].
Given the high mortality rate without intervention, early diagnosis and treatment of AST remain paramount in order to prevent poor outcomes. There are limited recommendations in the current published literature for a streamlined diagnostic approach and management strategy to provide guidance to clinicians [2, 8, 9]. In this case report, we highlight a diagnostic approach and management of AST by use of targeted intravenous (IV) antibiotics followed by transition to oral antibiotics in an adult patient with a history of IV drug use and a preexisting goiter.
The patient is a 26-year-old female with a past medical history significant for IV drug use and a right-sided multinodular goiter who presented with five days of anterior neck swelling, predominantly on the right side, and associated tenderness to palpation. In the week prior to presentation, the patient had developed a sore throat, fatigue, and rhinorrhea, along with an abscess on the posterior aspect of her left forearm where she injects heroin. She denied ever injecting drugs into her neck or shoulders. Her review of systems was negative for fevers, chills, rigors, shortness of breath, wheezing, difficulty breathing, dysphagia, and chest pain. She further denied weakness, muscle twitching, diarrhea, constipation, weight loss, weight gain, and palpitations. Her multinodular goiter had been discovered about one year prior. At the time, she was asymptomatic and thyroid function tests were within normal limits, but no fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy was performed.
On admission, the patient was febrile to 100.9∼F and tachycardic to 130?beats/minute, with blood pressure of 134/88?mm﹞Hg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. Bedside incision and drainage of the left forearm abscess was performed, and cultures grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). Laboratory workup was significant for an elevated white blood cell count of 23.8/米L with differential showing 84.6% neutrophils. Thyroid function tests showed a TSH of 0.02?U/mL, free T4 of 3.89?ng/dL, and free T3 of 5.1?pg/mL, consistent with thyrotoxicosis. The patient was HIV negative and hepatitis C antibody positive. Within the first 24 hours, one out of two blood cultures was positive for MSSA. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck with contrast showed a 6.4?℅?6.1?℅?7.1?cm mass regional to the right thyroid lobe, heterogeneous in appearance with multiple septations and with solid enhancing and cystic components (Figure 1). Mild-to-moderate edema/inflammatory changes were evident along the retropharyngeal space. Additionally, mild luminal narrowing and posterior displacement of the right common carotid artery, lateral displacement and marked narrowing of the right internal jugular vein, and leftward deviation of the trachea were apparent.
The patient was started on IV ampicillin-sulbactam, as her clinical picture was concerning for AST. Additionally, she was started on naproxen 500?mg twice daily and propranolol 20?mg three times daily for inflammation and thyrotoxicosis, respectively. Over the first four days of hospitalization, the patient remained afebrile, and the leukocytosis and neck swelling improved. A thyroid ultrasound was performed on day 4 to further evaluate for a drainable abscess given the concern for AST. The ultrasound showed a heterogeneous, necrotic, and hypervascular mass in the right lobe measuring 6.8?℅?4.8?℅?4.5?cm, without any drainable abscess (Figure 2). The patient subsequently underwent ultrasound-guided FNA; cultures grew MSSA, and cytology was consistent with follicular lesion of undetermined significance. A transesophageal echocardiogram ruled out endocarditis. On day 8 of hospitalization, the patient was transitioned from IV ampicillin-sulbactam to oral amoxicillin-clavulanate and discharged home to complete a total of 14 days of antibiotics. She was also discharged on the same regimen of propranolol and naproxen. The patient was instructed to follow up at the endocrinology clinic in one month and receive a repeat FNA in three to six months.
Here, we present a case of AST that could have been misdiagnosed and improperly treated as subacute thyroiditis. Both AST and subacute thyroiditis may present with painful thyroid swelling, fever, and leukocytosis following a URTI. In this case, atypical features for AST include the patient＊s age, presence of thyrotoxicosis, lack of dysphagia, dysphonia, and airway compromise, and marked clinical improvement within four days of admission [4]. Thyrotoxicosis only occurs in 5每10% of patients with AST and is more often associated with subacute thyroiditis. Subacute thyroiditis, while far more common, is self-limiting; AST, while rare, can be life-threatening. Nevertheless, the patient had several risk factors for AST that increased clinical suspicion, allowing for an appropriate diagnostic workup and course of antibiotics to prevent complications. Misdiagnosis is particularly dangerous as administration of prednisone, used for subacute thyroiditis, may lead to deterioration of AST [10].
In adults, proposed routes of infection for AST include lymphatic or hematogenous spread, direct inoculation of the thyroid or surrounding anatomy, direct extension of an abscess, and spread through a pyriform sinus fistula, usually in the setting of preexisting thyroid disease or an immunocompromised state [2, 11]. Based on the patient＊s history, several mechanisms may explain her AST. She was an IV drug user who presented with an MSSA abscess in her forearm, along with MSSA bacteremia. Thus, there is the strong possibility for hematogenous spread of MSSA from the forearm abscess to the thyroid. Although the patient denied injecting heroin into her neck or shoulders, there is also the possibility for direct inoculation of the thyroid. Furthermore, the patient had a preexisting multinodular goiter of one-year duration that showed follicular lesion of undetermined significance on cytology. Abnormal thyroid structures, such as multinodular goiters, nodules, or malignancies, have been postulated to make the thyroid gland more susceptible to suppuration [2]. In particular, Erdamar et al. found that the enzymatic free radical defense system was impaired in 41 patients with multinodular goiters and papillary carcinomas [12]. A weakened antioxidant defense mechanism may predispose the thyroid to bacterial infections. Few other cases in the literature report AST in the context of a preexisting multinodular goiter [13每15].
Given the potentially life-threatening sequelae of AST, the threshold for performing ultrasound-guided FNA to rule in/out AST should be relatively low, especially in a patient with one or more predisposing factors. Ideally, thyroid FNA cultures should be obtained prior to antibiotic administration to prevent unnecessary treatment and reduce the risk of a false-negative thyroid culture. Nevertheless, the patient in this case was treated empirically with ampicillin-sulbactam prior to obtaining a thyroid FNA a few days into her hospital stay. Had ampicillin-sulbactam not been started early on in her hospital stay, the thyroid mass may have further compressed the trachea, leading to significant narrowing and airway compromise.
Because AST is rare and may present with varying levels of severity, there are few high-level evidence studies that clearly define optimal management strategies. AST was traditionally managed with a combination of surgical and medical treatment modalities involving partial or total thyroidectomy or surgical drainage and targeted antibiotic therapy. In more recent nonrandomized clinical practice and case reports, there has been a greater emphasis on an upfront medical approach with targeted IV antibiotic therapy [8, 16]. The optimal duration of IV antibiotic therapy is unclear, with expert opinion recommending 14 days [2]. Isolated case reports have continued IV antibiotics for up to 37 days, even in patients who demonstrated early response [17]. As our patient lacked signs of airway compromise and a drainable thyroid abscess, and improved rapidly over the first four days, the decision was made by day 8 to transition her to oral antibiotics and discharge on a 14-day total course. Further studies are needed to refine therapeutic approaches based on the severity of disease presentation.
This case demonstrates the importance of assessing patient risk factors for AST, even when clinical presentation may seem more typical of subacute thyroiditis. Prompt diagnosis with ultrasound-guided FNA and cultures may allow for targeted antibiotic therapy and prevent complications associated with AST. There is a lack of high-quality studies assessing the optimal management strategy for AST; as such, treatment should be guided by the severity of disease presentation. Further investigation is needed to assess the effectiveness of shorter courses of therapy and/or transition to oral antibiotics in less severe presentations showing early clinical improvement.
Cochlear Implantation in Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease: Case Report and Review of the Literature
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a peripheral hereditary neuropathy associated with motor and sensory impairment and can result in profound sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). Currently, the role of cochlear implantation in the setting of CMT and other progressive peripheral neurodegenerative disorders is not well established. Methods. Case report and review of the English literature. Results. A 70-year-old male with CMT was referred for evaluation of progressive asymmetric SNHL and reported a 15-year duration of deafness involving the left ear. Audiometric testing confirmed profound SNHL in the left ear, while the right ear exhibited moderate-to-severe SNHL. Left-sided cochlear implantation was performed using a conventional length lateral wall electrode. Intraoperative device testing found normal impedance levels throughout the array; however, electrically evoked auditory potentials were absent on all electrodes. Upon initial activation 3 weeks after surgery, the patient reported excellent access to sound in the cochlear implant-only condition. He has made good progress at each subsequent visit; speech perception testing after seven months showed improvement from 0% to 32% on AzBio sentence and 53% on CNC phoneme testing in the cochlear implant-only condition. Conclusion. We report the third case of cochlear implantation in a patient with CMT. SNHL in CMT is hypothesized to result from disruption of synchronous activity of the cochlear nerve. In patients with CMT, cochlear implantation may reconstitute synchronous neural activity by way of supraphysiological electrical stimulation. Our results corroborate two earlier reports that cochlear implantation is a viable option for rehabilitation of SNHL in this unique subset of patients.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders affecting the peripheral nervous system. The disease can manifest in profound SNHL, hypothesized to result from disruption of synchronous activity of the cochlear nerve. Given that CMT affects the retrocochlear auditory pathway, there have been theoretical concerns that CI is incapable of providing meaningful auditory stimulation. Two previous cases of CI in patients with CMT have been described in the world literature; thus, the role of cochlear implants in auditory rehabilitation of CMT-associated SNHL is poorly defined [1, 2]. We present a patient with CMT-associated deafness successfully treated with cochlear implantation.
A 70-year-old male with CMT was referred for evaluation of progressive asymmetric SNHL and reported a 15-year duration of deafness involving the left ear. He was initially a bilateral hearing aid user but subsequently stopped using his hearing aid in the left ear several years prior due to experiencing progressive audiometric decline. Audiometric testing confirmed profound SNHL in the left ear, while the right ear exhibited moderate-to-severe SNHL. Information regarding the subtype of his CMT is unavailable at our tertiary care facility; prior workup was performed at another institution.
Left-sided cochlear implantation was performed using a conventional length lateral wall electrode. The electrodes were introduced without resistance, and a full insertion was achieved using the MED-EL? Synchrony Flex? 28 cochlear implant. Intraoperative device testing found normal impedance levels throughout the array; however, electrically evoked auditory potentials were absent on all electrodes. Upon initial activation 3 weeks after surgery, the patient reported excellent access to sound in the cochlear implant-only condition. He has made good progress at each subsequent visit; speech perception testing after seven months showed improvement from 0% preoperatively to 32% on AzBio sentence and 53% on CNC phoneme testing in the cochlear implant-only condition. At an 18-month phone follow-up, he reports improving subjective benefit and consistent usage of the device.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most commonly occurring hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy. CMT can be classified as types 1 to 7, X, and intermediate, with many subtypes. CMT is genetically heterogeneous with more than 30 genes identified to date. Despite this, the vast majority of cases are attributed to mutations in just four of these genes: PMP22, MPZ, GJB1, and MFN2. CMT types 1 and 2 represent by far the largest proportion of patients; these classifications are based off features of demyelinating (CMT1) or axonal (CMT2) dysfunction. Motor weakness is the predominant symptom, typically arising in the first or second decade of life. The majority of treatment options are directed towards alleviation of motor deterioration; there have been few reports describing the management of hearing loss in patients with CMT [3].
Hearing loss in patients with CMT is associated with point mutations or deletions in the peripheral myelin protein (PMP) 22 gene, a myelin regulatory gene [4]. Neural conduction abnormalities in the auditory pathway lead to the auditory deficits seen in individuals with CMT. While the exact pathogenesis of deafness in CMT patients is uncertain, it has been proposed that the resultant SNHL is a consequence of retrocochlear dysfunction. The failure to detect auditory brainstem responses is theorized to result from the loss of discharge synchrony secondary to demyelination or axonal disruption of the cochlear nerve [5, 6].
Traditionally, retrocochlear disease affecting the auditory pathway has been considered a contraindication to CI. In patients with auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD), there is an absence of auditory brainstem responses despite the intact outer hair cell function. ANSD results in poor speech discrimination while general awareness of speech is often retained. The resultant severe impairment in temporal processing ability was originally thought to be unchanged by CI; however, over the last decade, we have seen several disease processes that have challenged this notion. Specifically, it is well documented that many patients with auditory nerve hypoplasia, auditory neuropathy, and acoustic neuroma with an intact cochlear nerve gain significant benefit from CI [7, 8]. In patients with CMT, cochlear implantation may reconstitute synchronous neural activity by way of supraphysiological electrical stimulation, thus improving speech discrimination scores.
Two prior cases of cochlear implantation in patients with SNHL attributed to CMT have been reported in the world literature [1, 2]. Each demonstrated improvements in speech discrimination scores. The improvement progression was noted to be slower than in the typical subset of patients receiving CI; however, significant benefit was eventually realized. Goswamy et al. described a 67-year-old male with CMT-attributed SNHL who underwent CI. Open-set speech discrimination (BKB sentences) scores were obtained at 1 week, 3 months, 9 months, and 21 months after activation and were noted to be 0, 0, 53, and 54%, respectively. Postelmans et al. described a 53-year-old female with CMT who first experienced a progressive hearing loss at 8 years of age; she had worn hearing aids for 25 years prior to undergoing CI. At 6 months postoperatively, she had improved to 59% word discrimination at 60?dB from preoperative discrimination of 50% at 75?dB. In our patient, similar findings were observed. We attribute his initial absent evoked auditory potentials to his extent and duration of deafness. A gradual improvement has been noted with each subsequent visit, and the patient has been pleased with his progress to date. It is important to note that his duration of deafness (15 years) should also be considered when evaluating his rate of progress.
We report the third case of cochlear implantation in a patient with CMT. Improvement of speech discrimination in this unique subset of patients has been shown to occur at a more gradual rate of progression. While no definitive recommendations concerning the efficacy of CI in patients with CMT have been established, our results corroborate two earlier reports that cochlear implantation is a viable option for rehabilitation of SNHL in CMT patients. Future study should be performed in an attempt to further define the role of CI in the setting of CMT.
Effect of Cathodal Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation on a Child with Involuntary Movement after Hypoxic Encephalopathy
The aim of the study was to investigate the effect of cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation to the supplementary motor area to inhibit involuntary movements of a child. An 8-year-old boy who developed hypoxic encephalopathy after asphyxia at the age of 2 had difficulty in remaining standing without support because of involuntary movements. He was instructed to remain standing with his plastic ankle-foot orthosis for 10?s at three time points by leaning forward with his forearms on a desk. He received cathodal or sham transcranial direct current stimulation to the supplementary motor area at 1?mA for 10?min. Involuntary movements during standing were measured using an accelerometer attached to his forehead. The low-frequency power of involuntary movements during cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation significantly decreased compared with that during sham stimulation. No adverse effects were observed. Involuntary movement reduction by cathodal stimulation to supplementary motor areas suggests that stimulations modulated the corticobasal ganglia motor circuit. Cathodal stimulation to supplementary motor areas may be effective for reducing involuntary movements and may be safely applied to children with movement disorders.
Involuntary movements, including those of hyperkinetic nature, hinder motor development in children. Hyperkinetic movement disorders are characterized by excessive and abnormal involuntary movements and include myoclonus, dystonia, and chorea. They are considered to mainly occur because of the impairment of basal ganglia (BG), reported to be closely linked to cortical brain areas such as the supplementary motor area (SMA) and primary motor cortex (M1) [1]. Certain nuclei in BG and motor-related cortical areas comprise the corticobasal ganglia (CBG) motor network [2], playing an important role in adjusting voluntary movements by inhibiting involuntary movements. The CBG motor circuit has three pathways. One is the direct pathway that is involved in initiating body movements by increasing thalamic excitability. The other two are the indirect and hyperdirect pathways, which are involved in inhibiting body movements by decreasing thalamic activity. The hyperdirect pathway is involved in motor preparation prior to motor execution, while the indirect pathway engages in movement cessation. A previous study reported that the input of the direct pathway was markedly increased compared with the other two pathways in hyperkinetic movement disorders [3]. This evidence suggests that the hyperactivity of the direct pathway in the CBG motor network is a crucial factor in hyperkinetic movement disorders.
In clinical situations, pharmacological therapy is frequently used for children with hyperkinetic movement disorders, although it is associated with a risk of serious adverse effects such as addiction and dependency [4]. Therefore, a safer treatment option with fewer adverse effects is required for children with hyperkinetic movement disorders. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) has recently drawn attention as a safe noninvasive method for modulating brain activity. The DCS supplies a weak electrical current of 1 or 2?mA to the brain via two surface electrodes on the head skin to facilitate (anodal stimulation) or inhibit (cathodal stimulation) cortical excitability of the stimulated brain area [5]. No adverse effects using tDCS in adult participants have been previously reported [6]. In addition, a previous study showed that cathodal tDCS to M1 safely improved dystonia symptoms in children [7]. Thus, tDCS has a great potential to be a safe and effective method of brain stimulation for children with movement disorders.
Here, we report a case of an 8-year-old boy with an abnormal movement of head and neck, a hyperkinetic movement disorder, following brain damage. We examined whether cathodal tDCS to SMA suppressed the abnormal excitability of SMA to reduce the activity of the CBG motor circuits, resulting in the inhibition of involuntary movements.
We present a case of an 8-year-old boy with involuntary movements of his limbs and trunk. He had hypoxic encephalopathy because of cardiopulmonary arrest after choking on food at the age of 2. He lost consciousness for 18?min owing to the cardiopulmonary arrest and was treated with hypothermia and steroid pulse therapies at our hospital for 3 months. He was then transferred to another hospital to undergo rehabilitation and returned home after 5.5 months. He underwent outpatient rehabilitation at our hospital since the age of 6. Results of the auditory reception subtest of the Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities indicated that he had an intellectual level of 5 years and 8 months; that is, he was normal in intellectual level. Although he had severe dysarthria, he was able to communicate using gestures or a communication board. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of his brain at the age of 6 showed a mild degree of cerebral atrophy with no clear BG lesion (Figure 1(a)). Fiber tractography using diffusion tensor imaging revealed no serious damage to the corticospinal tracts on either side (Figure 1(b)). His family history, perinatal period, developmental history, and past medical history were all normal. In his clinical assessments, manual muscle testing scores of the upper extremities, trunk, and lower extremities were 4/5, 2/5, and 2/5, respectively, with no side-to-side differences. Although his muscle tone and somatosensory function were normal, he was unable to maintain his posture or stabilize his extremities because of involuntary movement that involved the whole body. In addition, his involuntary movement was exacerbated before he initiated a voluntary movement. In daily life, he required a trunk belt to sit on a chair, and he could not stand without the support for his weight with both hands.
The patient was instructed to remain standing with his plastic ankle-foot orthosis for 10?s, leaning forward on a desk on his forearms. Movement of his head during standing was measured using an accelerometer attached to the glabella for 10?s at three time points: before, during, and after tDCS. Acceleration data were recorded at a sampling rate of 1?kHz using an analog-to-digital converter (Power Lab 16/35; AD Instruments, Aichi, Japan) (Figure 2(a)) and were analyzed using specialized software (Lab Chart 7; AD Instruments, Aichi, Japan) to calculate and sum the power spectra within 1每5?Hz for each axis on three dimensions (x-, y-, and z-axis) (Figure 2(b)). We compared the ratios of power spectrum data (% power) during and after tDCS and divided this by the data prior to tDCS.
For the effective stimulation of tDCS, before this experiment we had already administered both anodal and cathodal stimulation to SMA and M1 of the patient and selected the cathodal stimulation to SMA from the other stimulations. Cathodal or sham tDCS was transcranially delivered to SMA at 1?mA for 10?min using a DC stimulator (neuroConn GmbH, Ilmenau, Germany) with 7?℅?5?cm electrodes. Each stimulation session was conducted for 3 days, at least 2 days apart. The cathodal electrode was placed over SMA, identified as 2?cm anterior to Cz in the International 10/20 EEG System, and the anodal electrode was placed over the left supraorbital region. In the stimulation period, the participant started the task 2?min after stimulation began. During stimulation, he was asked to keep standing for 10?s at three time points without interruption.
The safety of tDCS was assessed by interviewing the patient and his mother, as well as through the examiner＊s observations. The patient was monitored and frequently asked whether he experienced pain or discomfort during and after tDCS. Before and after tDCS sessions, the experimenter carefully checked the skin where the electrodes were placed. The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine. The patient and his parent gave informed written consent.
Percent power data were analyzed via two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the factors ※stimulation§ (cathodal stimulation and sham stimulation) and ※time§ (before, during, and after tDCS). In post hoc analysis, multiple comparison was performed using the Bonferroni correction. The level of significance was set at . All analyses were performed using SPSS for Windows (version 20.0; IBM, Armonk, NY, USA).
Figure 3 showed results of % power data. The two-way ANOVA showed main effects of ※stimulation§ (F?=?7.3, ) and ※time§ (F?=?4.2, ). There was a statistically significant interaction of ※stimulation§?℅?※time§ (F?=?4.8, ). Specifically, the % power during tDCS was significantly reduced compared with that during sham stimulation. The % power during tDCS was also significantly reduced, compared with that before tDCS but not with that during sham stimulation. Post hoc analysis for the factor ※stimulation§ showed that % power during tDCS was decreased, compared with that during sham stimulation. Post hoc analysis for the factor ※time§ showed that % power during tDCS was significantly decreased, compared with that before tDCS. The study sessions were completed with no adverse effects.
We examined whether cathodal tDCS to SMA could inhibit rapid involuntary movements with cyclic patterns in an 8-year-old boy with hyperkinetic disorder. Results demonstrated that cathodal tDCS to SMA decreased involuntary movements of the head and neck during standing, as measured using an accelerometer attached to the forehead. Given that we observed no issues or adverse effects from tDCS, we conclude that tDCS is potentially a safe method for treating children with involuntary movement disorders.
Although the exact mechanism of reducing involuntary movements by tDCS is unknown, there are several possibilities for explaining this effect. A possible hypothesis is that tDCS to SMA can modulate abnormal excitation of the CBG network by inhibiting SMA activity. In turn, this could lead to decreased activity of the striatum, which inhibits the inhibitory output from the BG network to the thalamus modulating the activity of the corticospinal tract [2].
The CBG motor network plays an important role in modulating voluntary movement and inhibiting involuntary movement during motor execution. In this study, cathodal tDCS to SMA could inhibit SMA activity, causing to decrease the abnormal activity of the BG. Furthermore, this would inhibit the activity of the thalamus via the striatum and internal segment of the globus pallidus, resulting in decreased excitability of M1. In summary, the cathodal tDCS to SMA normalized the activity of the CBG motor circuit. In the present study, there is a possibility that the tDCS stimulated the M1 directly because the size of the electrodes used was 7?℅?5?cm. This direct stimulation to the M1 area may decrease the abnormal involuntary movements of his body by inhibiting the activity of the M1 area that innervates the movement of the foot and trunk.
There was another possibility that the patient＊s abnormal involuntary movement was caused by Lance每Adams syndrome (LAS), with involuntary movements developed after hypoxic encephalopathy. Although no obvious lesion was detected in MR images, his involuntary movements first appeared after cardiopulmonary arrest. Previous studies reported that LAS is responsible for the hyperactivity of the thalamocortical pathway, which is modulating by the motor-related cortical areas such as SMA and M1 [8, 9]. Even if his abnormal involuntary movement was derived from LAS, tDCS to SMA could modulate the hyperactivity of the thalamocortical pathway, resulting in decreasing involuntary movements associated with the M1 activity.
Although some previous studies reported that tDCS induced adverse effects such as tingling, burning under the electrodes, sensation-like pain, and headache [6], no adverse effects were observed in our study. Our findings suggest that tDCS is a safe treatment method for children with involuntary movement disorders. A limitation of this study was that the reduction of the abnormal involuntary movements by tDCS was only the short-lasting effects. Further studies must confirm the long-lasting effects of tDCS on hyperkinetic movement disorders in children in order to apply tDCS to clinical practice.
Diffuse Gastric Ganglioneuromatosis: Novel Presentation of PTEN Hamartoma Syndrome〞Case Report and Review of Gastric Ganglioneuromatous Proliferations and a Novel PTEN Gene Mutation
Gastrointestinal ganglioneuromatous proliferations are rare, most often found in the colon, and are three types: polypoid ganglioneuromas, ganglioneuromatous polyposis, and diffuse ganglioneuromatosis. We present a case of diffuse ganglioneuromatosis in the posterior gastric wall in a nine-year-old female. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of diffuse ganglioneuromatosis located in the stomach. Only six cases of gastric ganglioneuromatous proliferations have previously been reported, two in English and none were diffuse ganglioneuromatosis. A diagnosis of diffuse ganglioneuromatosis is relevant for patient care because, unlike sporadic polypoid ganglioneuromas or ganglioneuromatous polyposis, most are syndromic. Diffuse ganglioneuromatosis is commonly associated with neurofibromatosis type 1, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2b, and Cowden Syndrome, one of the phenotypes of PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. The patient had the noted gastric diffuse ganglioneuromatosis, as well as other major and minor criteria for Cowden syndrome. Genetic testing revealed a novel frameshift mutation in the PTEN gene in the patient, her father, paternal aunt, and the aunt＊s son who is a paternal first cousin of the patient.
Gastrointestinal ganglioneuromas are rare tumors, most often found in the descending colon, rectum and occasionally the appendix. They are of three types: polypoid ganglioneuromas, ganglioneuromatous polyposis, and diffuse ganglioneuromatosis [1, 2]. Polypoid ganglioneuromas are usually single polyps that are sporadic and indolent. Ganglioneuromatosis polyposis, as the name implies, consists of many polyps, while diffuse transmural ganglioneuromas have a high association with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2b (MEN 2b), and PTEN hamartoma syndrome [3] (OMIM 601728). Less well-known associations include Hirschsprung＊s disease, tuberous sclerosis, familial adenomatous polyposis, and juvenile polyposis [4, 5].
Our case is unique because it is one of only six previously reported ganglioneuromatous proliferations found in the stomach and is the first case of diffuse ganglioneuromatosis [6每9]. This case also identifies a previously unreported mutation in the PTEN gene consistent with the PTEN-related findings observed clinically in our patient, her father, paternal aunt, and the aunt＊s son who is a paternal cousin of the patient.
A nine-year-old Caucasian female presented with symptoms of reflux and postprandial gagging, dysphagia, epigastric pain, and fecal withholding. Her medical history was significant for prematurity, born at twenty-five weeks gestation and related conditions of prematurity including retinopathy, anemia, and lung disease. She was born with a mild ventricular septal defect and a patent ductus arteriosus that failed to close with two trials of indomethacin and required surgical ligation. After birth, she spent four months in the neonatal intensive care unit, requiring supplemental oxygen and placement of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube for feeding. She was diagnosed with esophageal glycogenic acanthosis (Figures 1(a)每1(c)) found on upper endoscopy performed at age twenty-two months for symptoms of reflux and feeding difficulties. She had retinopathy of prematurity that was treated with laser surgery and strabismus that was treated with botulinum injections. Macrocephaly, global developmental delays, and a limited attention span were present in early childhood. MRI of her brain at age 7 years showed signs of mild periventricular leukomalacia and no other abnormalities.
On exam, the patient was developmentally delayed for her age, and her head circumference was 56.4?cm, which is macrocephalic for age (98th percentile for head circumference in a 9-year-old girl is 55?cm) [10]. Skin exam showed well-healed scars from prior surgeries but no lipomas or other mucocutaneous features of Cowden syndrome. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable.
Due to her clinical symptoms, upper endoscopy was performed, and a variegated fungating mass with very prominent lymphoreticular nodularity and friability was found along the medial aspect of the lesser curvature of the stomach at the juncture of the body with the antrum. The size of the mass was difficult to estimate on endoscopy but appeared to be 2?cm in width and 3?cm in length on a pedicle that was about 1.5?cm at the base (Figures 2(a)每2(d)). Biopsies of the mass were obtained at several levels, including the base and tip. The remainder of the stomach, esophagus, and upper duodenum were also sampled showing reactive gastropathy, mild reflux changes, and mild active duodenitis, respectively. Microscopy of the biopsied gastric mass was interpreted to be a ganglioneuromatous proliferation with small foci in the lamina propria of spindled cells in fascicles with slightly atypical nuclei, positive on S100 protein and SOX-10 immunohistochemically stained tissue sections (Figures 3(a) and 3(b) a single, well-formed ganglion cell was noted in one of the areas of spindle cells, positive for neuron specific enolase (NSE) by immunohistochemistry (Figures 4(a) and 4(b)). Ki-67 was negative in the spindle cells, supporting a low proliferative index. The spindled cells were negative for CD34 and CD117, helping exclude gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) was negative, suggesting against a perineuroma. Keratin AE1/AE3, SMA, and melan-A were all negative, suggesting against a spindled carcinoma, melanoma, and leiomyomatous proliferation. GFAP was negative, as sometimes can be seen in Schwann cells and ganglion cells [11].
Three weeks later, a partial gastrectomy was undertaken to completely remove the mass, confirmed as a ganglioneuromatous proliferation of the diffuse ganglioneuromatosis type (Figures 5 and 6(a) and 6(b)). No polygonal or columnar cells typically seen in paragangliomas were noted, and the presence of ganglion cells excluded schwannoma and neurofibroma. Thus, the diagnosis of diffuse ganglioneuromatosis was confirmed. The patient＊s symptoms of reflux, postprandial gagging, dysphagia, and epigastric pain resolved following surgery.
The patient＊s father had a prior history of macrocephaly and a large benign tumor removed from his left flank at age 17 years. Past medical history was also significant for diabetes mellitus and testicular lipoma. He presented at age 29 years with a symptomatic multinodular goiter. Thyroidectomy was performed. The pathology of the gland revealed multifocal papillary thyroid cancer and nodular dysplasia with the largest nodule being 2.4?cm. He had one lymph node sampled that was negative for metastasis, and he was given radioactive iodine therapy for definitive treatment. His primary care provider diagnosed him with ※multiple hamartoma syndrome.§ His examination at age 31 years was notable for macrocephaly, subcutaneous lipomas, penile freckling, and many axillary skin tags. The rest of the patient＊s family history was remarkable for a paternal aunt that underwent partial gastric resection at age nineteen for what was diagnosed as a hamartomatous polyp, unspecified, and thyroid goiter that was treated with thyroidectomy. The paternal aunt had a son with symptomatic hydrocephalus that was shunted at age 2 years, macrocephaly, type 1 Chiari malformation, and penile freckling. The patient＊s paternal grandfather died at age twenty-seven years from renal and lung cancer.
The differential diagnosis of spindle cell tumors includes gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), schwannoma, leiomyoma, neurofibroma, gangliocytic paraganglioma, and ganglioneuroma [1, 12]. The presence of ganglion cells and negative staining for CD117 and CD34 in the spindled cells excludes the diagnosis of GIST. Schwann cell proliferations of the stomach are most likely to be a schwannoma or neurofibroma; however, both are excluded by the presence of ganglion cells. Negative SMA stain excludes leiomyoma. Lastly, gangliocytic paraganglioma is a triphasic tumor of epithelioid, ganglion, and spindle cells usually occurring in the ampulla of Vater. Gangliocytic paraganglioma is excluded because no polygonal or columnar epithelioid cells, usually keratin positive, are found, and the keratin AE1/AE3 is negative in the mucosal biopsy specimen.
Ganglioneuromas are rare tumors of the GI tract composed of ganglion cells, nerve fibers, and supporting cells [13]. Polypoid ganglioneuromas are most often small, sessile, or pedunculated polyps that grossly resemble juvenile polyps, adenomas, or hyperplastic polyps. Microscopically polypoid ganglioneuromas can appear as collections of spindle cells in a fibrillary matrix, irregular groups, and nests of ganglion cells in the lamina propria. They can also appear as a nodular mucosal and submucosal ganglion and spindle cell proliferation that suggests a neurofibroma or as nodular mucosal proliferations of clustered ganglion cells admixed with varying amounts of spindle cells without any significant disarray of the mucosal architecture [14]. There have been some cases of polypoid ganglioneuromas reported in Cowden syndrome [14, 15] as found on surveillance endoscopy in this patient.
Ganglioneuromatosis polyposis is distinguished by numerous sessile or pedunculated mucosal and/or submucosal lesions showing greater variability in neural, supportive, and ganglion cell content with demarcation compared to polypoid ganglioneuromas. Diffuse ganglioneuromatosis is a poorly demarcated, nodular, and diffuse intramural or transmural proliferation of ganglioneuromatous tissue that diffusely involves the enteric, most often myenteric, nerve plexuses. The histological growth pattern varies from fusiform, hyperplastic expansions of the myenteric plexus to confluent, irregular, transmural ganglioneuromatous proliferations that distort the myenteric plexus and infiltrates the adjacent bowel wall.
A ganglioneuroma of the stomach is extremely unusual, with only six cases previously reported. Our patient＊s mass had the endoscopic appearance of a juvenile polyp but the histology of a ganglioneuromatous proliferation. Polypoid ganglioneuroma is not favored due to the presence of diffuse transmural involvement of the gastric wall, favoring diffuse ganglioneuromatosis. Ganglioneuromatous polyposis is not favored because polyposis is not present. Diffuse ganglioneuromatosis of the GI tract is associated with other tumors and syndromes, including PTEN hamartoma syndrome, MEN 2b, NF1 (von Recklinghausen＊s disease), and neurogenic sarcoma [16].
PTEN gene sequencing was performed on the patient and her father in a CLIA-approved commercial laboratory (GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD). A c.271_272delGAinsTT mutation in the PTEN gene was found in both individuals. The mutation is expected to cause a frameshift, in which the glutamic acid at codon 91 is changed to phenylalanine, and a premature stop codon is created at position 4 of the new reading frame, denoted p.Glu91PhefsX4. This mutation is predicted to cause loss of normal protein function either through protein truncation or nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Although this mutation has not been previously reported to our knowledge, its presence is consistent with the clinical diagnosis of Cowden syndrome in this patient and her father. Both individuals were educated by a clinical geneticist regarding the diagnosis, and an appropriate vigilant cancer surveillance program [17] was tailored to the patient and her father. On the patient＊s initial thyroid ultrasound, a thyroid nodule was discovered. The patient＊s parents elected a thyroidectomy instead of clinical surveillance. A total thyroidectomy was performed that revealed both a minimally invasive follicular carcinoma (Figure 7) and lymphocytic thyroiditis. Yearly surveillance upper endoscopy and lower endoscopy studies showed a colonic polypoid ganglioneuroma at 30?cm at age 10 and two additional distal colonic polypoid ganglioneuromas at age 12. The patient＊s paternal aunt and her son also had genetic testing, and were found to carry the same PTEN mutation. They also received genetic counseling and were started on a cancer surveillance program.
The phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) gene, at cytogenetic location 10q23.31, negatively regulates signaling pathways that are critical for cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, and apoptosis. Loss of function of this gene either through inherited or sporadic mutations contributes to oncogenesis, as it is considered to be a tumor suppressor gene [18]. Germline mutations of PTEN have been described in a variety of rare and clinically underrecognized syndromes, collectively known as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (OMIM 601728). The phenotypic spectrum of PTEN-related syndromes includes two allelic disorders linked to mutations in the PTEN gene: Cowden syndrome and Bannayan每Riley每Ruvalcaba syndrome [19]. The relation of Proteus syndrome and Proteus-like syndrome with PTEN mutations is controversial [20].
Hypogammaglobulinemia Observed One Year after Rituximab Treatment for Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic Purpura
We present the case of a 19-year-old female with severe hypogammaglobulinemia after having had treatment with rituximab for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura requiring intravenous immunoglobulins. She was admitted with the diagnosis of left-sided pneumonia with parapneumonic effusion. The patient was treated with piperacillin/tazobactam after having a poor response to co-amoxiclav. The patient had been tested for immunoglobulin levels, and the levels were very low. She has a history of ITP for which she received steroids. She also received rituximab for the same on four separate occasions, and the last one was about 1 year ago.
Humoral immunity is dependent on a full repertoire of mature B-lymphocytes capable of adequately mounting a primary and secondary immune response. If the abovementioned phenomenon is impaired, it will invariably lead to severe bacterial infections as can be evaluated by the disease spectrum in inborn and acquired immunodeficiencies. Regarding the former, common variable immune deficiency (CVID) is a heterogeneous entity characterized by varying degrees of hypogammaglobulinemia and recurrent bacterial infections [1, 2].
Rituximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody binding CD20, is increasingly used in the treatment of B-cell lymphomas [3, 4]. Rituximab is responsible for causing a rapid depletion of CD20-expressing B-cell precursors and mature B-cells, which remain at very low or undetectable levels for months before returning to pretreatment levels [5]. Rituximab can lead to a state of immunosuppression through B-cell depletion and also through the development of late-onset neutropenia and hypogammaglobulinemia [6, 7]. Although rituximab is known to cause hypogammaglobulinemia in people with normal immunoglobulins prior to treatment, its effect on immunoglobulins is transient [8]. Here, we describe an interesting case of a young female who developed severe hypogammaglobulinemia diagnosed 1 year after receiving rituximab requiring the administration of immunoglobulin therapy (as noted in one study in up to 4.2% of 243 patients [9]) [10].
A 19-year-old female presented to the emergency department with chest pain, shortness of breath, and productive cough for a few weeks. Her past medical history included immune thrombocytopenic purpura, initially treated with tapering dose of steroids followed by a course of rituximab after the poor response to steroid treatment. She had received four cycles of rituximab, last one approximately a year ago. We did not find any record of her immunoglobulin level being checked before and after the treatment. Physical examination showed left-sided chest crackles on auscultation and lymphadenopathy in the cervical, axillary, and inguinal regions. Initial investigations revealed low hemoglobin, high C-reactive protein, and low globulin levels. Her chest X-ray showed left-sided pleural effusion and basal consolidation. A provisional diagnosis of pneumonia with parapneumonic effusion was made, and she was treated with piperacillin/tazobactam after poor response to co-amoxiclav plus clarithromycin. Due to poor response to antibiotics and generalized lymphadenopathy, we decided to perform CT-neck, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis to lookout for possible hematological malignancies. CT revealed enlarged lymph nodes in cervical, mediastinal, bilateral axillary, periaortic, and mesenteric regions and left-sided pleural effusion. There was a possibility of lymphoma. She had a pleural fluid drainage, and it was then studied for microscopy and histopathology. Pleural fluid histopathology showed no evidence of malignancy. Lymph node biopsy was done to exclude malignancy. Her immunoglobulin concentration was determined, and there was complete absence of IgM, IgA, and IgG. The immunologist suggested commencing the patient with immunoglobulin replacement therapy urgently, and the case was diagnosed as having severe hypogammaglobulinemia most likely secondary to rituximab therapy. Her status improved considerably following her acute admission to the hospital. We did not find any record of immunoglobulin levels prior to this admission.
On investigation, the TSH level was 1.30?IU/L (0.35每4.94). Vitamin B12 level was 279?pg/ml (189每1162), folate 10.7?ng/ml (3.1每2.0), ferritin 72?ng/ml (5每204), globulin level 15?g/l (21每36), urea 1.9?mmol/l (2.5每6.7), creatinine 52?米mol/l (50每98), albumin 36?g/l (35每50), total protein 51?g/l (60每80), hemoglobin 10.7?g/dl (12.0每15.0), white blood cell count 6.6?℅?109/L (4.0每10), neutrophil count 4.96 (2.0每7.0), lymphocyte count 1.05 (1.0每3.0), monocyte count 0.47 (0.2每1.0), eosinophil count 0.07 (0.1每1.0), basophil count 0.02 (0.02每0.1), and platelet count 224?℅?109/L (150每410).
Blood film showed anisocytosis and small number of pencil cells.
Pleural fluid microscopy revealed RBC count of 1700?cmm and white blood cell count of 600?cmm. However, no bacteria were seen on Gram staining of pleural fluid, and differentials showed polymorphs 84% and monocytes 16%. There was no growth on blood culture. Throat swab was negative for influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, human metapneumovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus. Lymph node biopsy histopathology reported atrophic B zones and expansion of T-cell zone and large number of CD30+ cells. Immunoglobulin concentration showed IgG 0.78?g/l (6.26每14.96), IgA 0.05?g/l (0.62每2.90), IgM 0.05?g/l (0.47每1.82), and 汕2 microglobulin 2.41?mg/l (1.20每2.50). The immunoglobulin levels were not repeated before commencing the intravenous immunoglobulin therapy.
The identification of mutations of ICOS, CD19, CD20, CD21, CD80, TACI, and BAFFR may be required to establish the diagnosis of CVID in this patient. But, the aim of this case report is to alert the clinicians to consider monitoring immunoglobulin levels before, during, and after treating an autoimmune condition with rituximab.
Iatrogenic hypogammaglobulinemia is an acquired hypogammaglobulinemia caused by various drugs including antirheumatic and antiepileptic medications, but clinically, it may be difficult to distinguish it from CVID. In contrast to this, common variable immune deficiency is a congenital disorder that involves low levels of most or all of immunoglobulins, lack of B-lymphocytes or plasma cells that are capable of producing antibodies, and repeated bacterial infections [11]. CVID has various clinical presentations and types of deficiencies. Deficiency of IgG and IgA is characteristic and approximately 50% of patients with CVID are deficient in IgM levels. As per the evidence, 20% of common variable immune deficiency patients develop some autoimmune diseases [12].
It is difficult to differentiate whether the hypogammaglobulinemia is caused by rituximab or the preexisting CVID has been aggravated by rituximab treatment [13], especially if there are no previous immunology and biochemistry tests available as in our case. According to the European Society for Immunodeficiencies Registry 2014, CVID has bimodal age of manifestation with peak in diagnosis between the ages of 5 and 10 years, a trough around the age of 20, and then another peak between 30 and 40 years [14]. The mean age at the onset of symptoms was 26.3 years. Therefore, it can be argued that preexisting CVID has been unmasked at this age in this patient. This patient reported no previous history of any significant infection prior to rituximab therapy. Although one episode of infection is not enough to consider the diagnosis of immunodeficiency, in this case, severity of infection, poor response to antibiotic, and a previous history of rituximab therapy led to our speculation of an acquired hypogammaglobulinemia. There are some studies that reported that patients already diagnosed with CVID and treated with rituximab showed decline in the levels of IgG. These patients were not on IgG replacement therapy [15].
Another possibility in this case can be speculated that her immune thrombocytopenic purpura could be an autoimmune manifestation of the underlying common variable immune deficiency syndrome. However, the point should be noted that only 20% of individuals with CVID develop other autoimmune conditions as stated earlier in the discussion [12]. Therefore, rituximab treatment is indeed a possible explanation for the observed hypogammaglobulinemia.
We would like to draw a reference from a study published by Patel et al., which outlines the outcomes of patients 5 years after rituximab therapy in children and adults with ITP. This extensive long-term follow-up study reports that ※treatments of patients with chronic ITP which provide a curative effect without untoward toxicity or poor tolerability are highly desirable. They allow a patient to avoid the disadvantages of low platelet counts including continued platelet count monitoring, continued treatment, and possibly bleeding and/or fatigue. The use of rituximab has been an exciting development in ITP because patients may achieve complete responses lasting at least 1 year without additional treatment. However, robust data on the long-term response to rituximab are lacking for both children and adults.
Intramuscular (Infiltrating) Lipoma of the Floor of the Mouth
Lipoma is a very common soft tissue neoplasm, but only infrequently found in the oral region. Intramuscular lipoma (IML) is a relatively common variant of lipoma. The most common site for IML is the large muscles of the extremities, and it is quite rare in the oral cavity. A case of IML affecting the floor of the mouth/tongue of a 42-year-old female is described. The patient presented with a 4?cm diameter yellow mass in the right side of the sublingual area. Axial and coronal magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated its infiltrating nature that can be distinguished from the ordinary well-encapsulated lesion. The lesion was excised with adequate surgical margins. Histopathologically, the lesion was composed of mature adipose tissue that infiltrated the muscle in a diffuse manner. No lipoblasts, atypical cells, or high mitotic index were found. There was no evidence of recurrence two years postoperatively. Review of the literature yielded that IML occurring in the sublingual region is extremely rare.
Lipomas are benign neoplasm composed of mature adipocytes. They are usually sharply circumscribed and possess some peripheral fibrous demarcation (pseudocapsule).
They are the most common tumor of the trunk and extremities. About 15每20% of cases involve the head and neck regions, while 1每4% affect the oral cavity [1, 2].
Oral lipomas (OLs) occur most commonly in the parotid region followed by the buccal mucosa, tongue, floor of the mouth, and palate. Histologically, lipomas are classified as classic lipoma, fibrolipoma, intramuscular lipoma (IML), angiolipoma, and spindle cell lipoma. OL usually presents as a slow-growing painless mass that rarely exceeds 20?mm in diameter [3]. The exact etiology of OL is unknown, although trauma and metaplasia of perivascular connective tissue have been suggested.
A 42-year-old female, generally healthy except for gastroesophageal reflux treated with lansoprazole 30?mg/day, presented with a 4.0?cm painless swelling of the right sublingual area that was growing slowly over three years. Clinical examination revealed a soft tissue mass, covered by the normal-appearing mucosa, with no ulceration (Figure 1). No cervical lymphadenopathy was noted. Axial and coronal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 41?℅?25?mm mass. The mass was hyperintense on T1 and underwent fat suppression. It involved the right floor of the mouth and tongue including the genioglossus, the hyoglossus, the mylohyoid, and the intrinsic muscles of the tongue (Figure 2). The clinical and radiological findings were consistent with a lipoma, but a liposarcoma was part of the differential diagnosis. The patient was advised to undergo a complete excision to which he consented.
Under general anesthesia, via an incision in the right floor of the mouth, the tumor was removed, together with a thin margin of normal muscle tissue, in the inferior aspect and some normal oral mucosa in the superior aspect.
The surgical specimen consisted of a soft yellow-white mass with smooth external surfaces and a uniform solid yellow cut surface.
Microscopic examination revealed mature adipose tissue with striated muscle fibers interspersed within (Figure 3). There was no evidence of cytological atypia, increased cellularity, or necrosis. In addition, all sections consisted of mature adipose tissue; no lipoblasts were identified. The final diagnosis was intramuscular (infiltrating) lipoma.
Oral lipomas (OLs) commonly present as a soft, mobile, lobulated, yellow mass. It is usually observed among adults, between the age of 40 and 60 years, with no gender preference. The most common site for OL is the buccal mucosa, a region that is normally rich with adipose tissue, followed by the tongue, lips, floor of the mouth, palate, and gingiva [3].OL consists of mature adipocytes organized into lobules that are separated by septa of fibrous tissue. Although the OL is morphologically indistinguishable from normal fat, it differs from normal body fat, in that lipids contained in the OL are metabolically inactive [4].
Oral IML seems to be larger in size and displays an infiltrative pattern of growth, as compared with the classic OL. It is characterized by a much deeper localization, slow-growing, painless mass that often can cause swelling and deformity. Its consistency is often rubbery. In the rare occasion, when the infiltration is very extensive, it may cause local muscle dysfunction or sensory disturbance, due to local pressure on a branch of the trigeminal nerve [5].
Oral IMLs are very rare and are described most commonly in the tongue [6, 7, 8].
Local recurrence rate for the IML is reported as high as 63% [6, 9]. This high rate is probably related to the infiltrative nature of the tumor.
Due to the infiltrative-like pattern of growth of IML, it may be difficult to distinguish IML from a well-differentiated liposarcoma, just by means of diagnostic imaging modalities (ultrasound (US), computerized tomography (CT), or MRI). Hence, the only way to obtain a diagnosis is by an incisional or excisional biopsy. In this case, the mass was completely resected without a biopsy. The authors felt that the lesion could be completely excised. In spite of the tumor appearing to invade the muscles, the degree of invasion based on palpation was limited, and the authors felt that the lesion involved some muscle fibers that could be completely excised without compromising the overall structure or function of the involved muscles. Alternatively obtaining an incisional or trucut biopsy before complete resection could be considered reasonable as well.
The mass of IML may present high-signal intensity with some strands of low-signal intensity, which may refer to the remnants of the lingual muscle fibers. CT appearance of a well-differentiated liposarcoma may be very similar to the remnants of infiltrated soft tissue [10]. Despite the growth pattern similarity between IML and well-differentiated liposarcoma/atypical lipomatous tumor, it can usually be differentiated. Adipocytes contain a large lipid droplet surrounded by a layer of cytoplasm. The nucleus is flattened and located on the periphery, whereas lipoblasts characteristically have abundant multivacuolated clear cytoplasm and a dark staining (hyperchromatic), indented nucleus. Lipoma rather than liposarcoma is diagnosed If the lesion does not show any of the following: lipoblastic proliferation, variation in adipocyte size, atypical and enlarged adipocyte nuclei, hyperchromatic, or bizarre stromal cells in fibrous septa, between adipocytes or in vessel walls [11, 12].
One more infiltrative lipoma to consider is the spindle cell lipoma which may occur occasionally in the tongue. Although it rarely infiltrates adjacent tissue, there are variants with predominance of the adipocyte component and unusual forms of multifocal disease [13] which may seem similar microscopically to IML.
Oral lipoma is quite rare. The variant of intramuscular (infiltrating) lipoma should be kept in mind and should be differentiated microscopically from liposarcoma. Complete surgical excision with minimal morbidity is recommended.
Myocarditis Secondary to Mesalamine-Induced Cardiotoxicity in a Patient with Ulcerative Colitis
Development of cardiac manifestations in patients diagnosed with inflammatory bowel disease undergoing treatment with mesalamine is a rare. When this occurs, it can be difficult to tease out the primary etiology, as both IBD and mesalamine can cause cardiac manifestations independently of each other. The exact mechanism of mesalamine-induced cardiotoxicity is yet to be determined although several mechanisms have been described. We present the case of a gentleman with nonexertional chest pain in the setting of ulcerative colitis exacerbation believed to have occurred secondary to mesalamine.
Ulcerative colitis (UC) is one of the two subtypes of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). It is a chronic inflammatory disease of the colon whose etiology is unknown but it is thought to occur via an autoimmune mechanism. It usually presents with abdominal discomfort, hematochezia, and diarrhea. UC is also known to cause extraintestinal manifestations such as uveitis and erythema nodosum. At times, UC may affect the heart causing pericarditis or myocarditis. Patients with UC are usually prescribed mesalamine which can also cause cardiac complications. Cardiotoxicity secondary to mesalamine usually improves with withdrawal of the medication while UC cardiotoxicity improves with adequate disease control. When these two entities occur together, it is challenging to tease out the primary etiology.
A 23-year-old Caucasian gentleman whose past medical history was significant for ulcerative colitis (UC), migraine without aura, allergic rhinitis, grade 3 obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, hypothyroidism, prediabetes, seizure disorder, and gastroesophageal reflux disease presented to the emergency department complaining of symptoms of UC flare including nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, bright red blood per rectum, and about ten bowel movements a day for approximately seven days. Review of systems was notable for dizziness, palpitations, and chest pain which had been ongoing for some time. The patient reported that he experiences intermittent, substernal, 8 out of 10, crushing left-sided chest pain radiating to his left mandible and left upper extremity. The patient stated that the pain was not exacerbated by activity but noted that whenever he started a steroid taper for his UC, the chest pain resolved only to recur when the taper was stopped. Current medications at time of visit to the ED included mesalamine and Levothyroxine.
Physical examination was normal except for tachycardia and abdominal pain to palpation without rebound, guarding, or rigidity. Labs were grossly normal except hemoglobin 12.3?g/dl, hematocrit 37.7, sedimentation rate 96?mm/hr, C-reactive protein 20.16?mg/dl, and troponin 14.55?ng/dl. EKG revealed sinus tachycardia without ischemic changes. CT angiogram of the chest was unrevealing. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated an akinetic apex, but overall preserved ejection fraction. A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) was ordered due to the patient＊s atypical presentation, young age, and lack of traditional risk factors for coronary artery disease. MRI revealed linear delayed hyper-enhancement involving the midmyocardium of the distal septum suspicious for myocarditis (Figures 1 and 2). The patient＊s mesalamine was discontinued, and he was started on Methylprednisolone. His condition improved, and he was discharged from the hospital with Adalimumab as his primary UC therapy.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) as the name implies is an inflammatory condition that affects the gastrointestinal tract. It is mainly divided into two subtypes, ulcerative colitis and Crohn＊s disease. IBD may also affect a variety of extraintestinal organs such as integumentary, musculoskeletal, and pulmonary organs. Extraintestinal manifestations are common and occur in approximately 25每30% of patients although cardiac involvement is rare [1每3]. Manifestations of cardiac involvement include pericarditis, myocarditis, and myopericarditis.
Mesalamine is an aminosalicylate anti-inflammatory drug commonly prescribed in patients with IBD. The exact mechanism of the drug is unknown but it is thought to inhibit prostaglandin formation by inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme thereby decreasing signaling via PPAR-污 pathway leading to decreased activity of nuclear factor ?B. Inhibiting this cascade leads to decreased colonic inflammation [1]. Common adverse effects of mesalamine include nausea, abdominal discomfort, headache, and fatigue. An additional side effect of mesalamine that has not been extensively described in literature is cardiotoxicity. The drug can cause pericarditis, myocarditis, and coronary vasculitis [3]. The specific mechanism of mesalamine-induced cardiotoxicity is yet to be described, but several hypotheses have been proposed. The first is accelerated metabolism of arachidonic acid to lipoxygenases secondary to inhibition of COX enzyme. This leads to the overproduction of eosinophil-stimulating cytokines thereby initiating a hypersensitivity reaction [4]. Another proposed mechanism involves humoral-mediated hypersensitivity, in which antibodies formed against mesalamine cross react with cardiac tissues causing inflammation [1, 3]. Other hypothesized mechanisms include a direct toxic effect of mesalamine on the myopericardium, a cell-mediated hypersensitive reaction, and an allergic reaction mediated by immunoglobulin E [4, 5]. Irrespective of the mechanism, it is very important to be aware of its cardiotoxic effects as symptomatology may range from benign chest discomfort to florid heart failure and cardiogenic shock. Symptoms usually begin within 2每4 weeks after initiation of the drug although presentation may be delayed due to concomitant use of steroids [3].
There are no physical findings, symptoms, or laboratory tests that are pathognomonic for mesalamine-induced cardiotoxicity [3]. The diagnosis is supported by relatively early onset of symptoms once the drug is begun, resolution of symptoms within one week after withdrawal, and by worsening of symptomatology once the drug is reintroduced in the acute phase [3]. This is in contrast to IBD cardiotoxicity which usually occurs years after initial diagnosis although it may occur on initial presentation [5, 6]. UC cardiotoxicity is usually a diagnosis of exclusion after connective tissue disorders, malignancy, infection, and metabolic causes have been ruled out [1]. Our patient presented with cardiac symptoms 6 months after initial diagnosis of UC. At time of initial diagnosis, he had no cardiac complaints. He was started on Mesalamine 800?mg PO TID along with 60?mg of prednisone which was to be tapered by 5?mg each week for 12 weeks. His 5?mg taper was decreased to a 10?mg taper, and he completed the regimen. His mesalamine formulation was switched to 2.4?mg daily of a long-acting preparation for easier dosing. 4 months later, he developed acute exacerbation of UC, requiring him to restart steroids and prompting his mesalamine dose to be increased to 4.8?mg daily. This was not sufficient with the patient having to report to the ED the following day.
The patient could not remember the exact onset of his chest pain but he did note that the pain improved with initiation of steroids and worsened or became more apparent whenever he tried to taper the steroids. We suspect the delayed presentation of myocarditis to be secondary to the coadministration of mesalamine and steroids. Mesalamine was discontinued, and the patient was started on methylprednisolone with eventual resolution of both chest discomfort and UC symptoms. He was started on adalimumab after discharge and has had no further cardiac complaints. He has continued to experience UC flares with associated spondyloarthropathy.
It is imperative to consider myopericarditis in patients with IBD being treated with mesalamine as both may cause severe cardiotoxicity with development of heart failure symptoms. In the case of mesalamine-induced cardiotoxicity, no specific therapy is needed as prompt withdrawal of the drug leads to rapid amelioration of symptoms although administration of steroids is not a frowned upon alternative. Steroid administration is the first choice of management in patients with IBD cardiotoxicity.
Renovascular Mistaken as Essential Hypertension due to Giant Hepatic Hydatid: A Rare Treatable Entity
Renovascular hypertension is an unusual but treatable cause of refractory hypertension that is infrequently caused by external compression of the renal vasculature by a giant hydatid cyst, a parasitic infection, caused by Echinococcus granulosus in its larval stage which is endemic in many parts of the world including Saudi Arabia. The disease can produce a cyst in almost every part of the body with the liver and lungs being the most frequently targeted organs producing a variety of symptoms depending upon the site and size of the cyst. We report a case of giant hepatic hydatid cyst with the possibility of renovascular hypertension due to mass effect as evident by dramatic drop of the blood pressure to its normotensive state postoperatively.
Renovascular hypertension is an unusual but treatable cause of refractory hypertension that is infrequently caused by compression of the renal vasculature by a giant hydatid cyst. Cystic echinococcosis (CE) is a parasitic illness caused by infection with Echinococcus granulosus(E. granulosus) in its larval stage [1]. The tapeworm stage is harbored in the intestine of carnivores such as dogs, which constitute the definitive host [2], and the eggs are passed in the feces of the infected carnivores and ingested by herbivores such as sheep, which comprise the intermediate host. Humans are the incidental intermediate host.
Larvae emerge from the eggs in the intestine, and after invasion to the blood vessels, they can migrate into almost every part of the body [3]. The most common site is the liver.
Large cysts, today fairly rare even in endemic areas, are called giant hydatid cysts (GHCs) [4, 5]. Hepatic hydatid cysts may show growth either in the liver capsule, gastrohepatic ligament, or peritoneum. Giant cyst as seen in our patient enlarging through the peritoneum may cause rare symptoms because of the intra-abdominal mass effect.
A 24-year-old native Arabian lady, mother of four, from the high mountainous area who was managed by a local primary healthcare centre as a case of essential hypertension, was referred to the medical outpatient department of our secondary care facility for uncontrolled hypertension for the last few months. After primary assessment, the medical team put her on antihypertensive medication and sent back home. On the next visit, her BP remained high despite combined antihypertensives with ACE inhibitor, beta-blocker, and Ca-channel blocker and complaining of right hypochondrial pain, for which ultrasonography was requested along with basic laboratory workup.
U/S shows a large cyst in the liver for which the patient was referred to surgical OPD for consultation. The surgical team decided for elective surgical exploration.
On admission, the patient vitals were stable except high BP of 155/91?mmHg and high ALP (221?U/l).
Ultrasonography showed a maternal right liver lobe hydatid cyst measuring 14?℅?16?cm, and CT scan revealed a large sizable hypodense cystic lesion of about 150?℅?150?℅?200?mm in AP?℅?TS?℅?CC dimensions, respectively, with multiple septations inside, being mainly in the right lobe, with peripheral calcific wall seen laterally with normal liver parenchyma (Figure 1), occupying almost the whole right lobe of the liver, exerting a mass effect in the form of right kidney, right renal vasculature, and IVC compression with no invasion in addition to medial displacement of the duodenum and midline structures. Exploratory laparotomy was done, and evacuation of a large hydatid cyst with deroofing was done by the standard protocol (Figure 2). Postoperatively, the patient had a spike of high BP in the postoperative holding area, which was managed by the medical team. On the 1st postoperative day, the patient was recovering well with BP findings of 130/80?mmHg for which antihypertensive medication was withhold on the 2nd postoperative day. The patient discharged on the 8th postoperative day, and on subsequent visit to the surgical OPD, the patient was doing well with normotensive findings without antihypertensive medications.
Most patients with a hydatid cyst in the liver are asymptomatic, and its presence becomes evident only when the liver is found to be enlarged or a cystic lesion is noted when the liver is imaged for any other reason [6]. In the general literature, arterial hypertension caused by hydatid disease has been reported only in few cases in which the cysts were located in the adrenal glands. Escudero et al. [7] reported a hydatid cyst located in the left adrenal gland which has caused the left kidney to displace inferiorly, resulting in hypertension. Tazi et al. [5] reported a giant primary adrenal hydatid cyst presenting with arterial hypertension in a 64-year-old Moroccan man who presented with the unusual symptom of arterial hypertension associated with left flank pain. Albarak et al. reported the first case of huge hepatic hydatid causing renovascular hypertension by compressing and rotating the right kidney and its vasculature in an already nephrectomized patient. Michael et al. [8] reported a case of renovascular hypertension, for a new-onset hypertensive crisis in a 54-year-old lady who presented to emergency department in whom a large benign liver cyst caused compression of the renal vasculature, and to the best of our knowledge, this is the 3rd case of hepatic hydatid disease causing hypertension. The attainment of the normotensive state after surgical removal of the cyst not only clarified the aetiology of hypertension but also provided with the management as well.
In conclusion, the mass effect of a giant hepatic hydatid cyst should be kept in mind as one of the unusual causes of hypertension when dealing with the patient where hydatid disease is endemic and the patient is refractory to antihypertensive medications.
A Case of Nongerminomatous Germ Cell Tumor of the Pineal Region: Risks and Advantages of Biopsy by Endoscopic Approach
A 21-year-old male was admitted to our department with headache and drowsiness. CT scan and MRI revealed acute obstructive hydrocephalus caused by a pineal region mass. The serum and CSF levels of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) were 215?IU/L and 447?IU/L, respectively, while levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were normal. A germ cell tumor (GCT) was suspected, and the patient underwent endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) with biopsy. After four days from surgery, the tumor bled with mass expansion and ETV stoma occlusion; thus, a ventriculoperitoneal shunt was positioned. After ten months, the tumor metastasized to the thorax and abdomen with progression of intracerebral tumor mass. Despite the aggressive nature of this tumor, ETV remains a valid approach for a pineal region mass, but in case of GCT, the risk of bleeding should be taken into account, during and after the surgical procedure.
Primary intracranial germ cell tumors (GCTs) are 3.1% of all primary brain tumors [1]; they affect pediatric population (mean age of 16.1 years) with a male?:?female ratio of 4?:?1 and are located in midline structures such as suprasellar and/or pineal region [2]; tumors contemporary located at suprasellar and pineal regions called synchronous GCT are 13% of all GCTs; these lesions are germinoma (60每80% of patients) with high sensitivity to radiotherapy [3], teratoma (18%), endodermal sinus tumors (7%), embryonal carcinomas (5%), and choriocarcinomas (5%). Teratoma is also divided into mature, immature, and anaplastic [4]. The clinical presentation is mainly related to the tumor location [5]: suprasellar lesions cause diabetes insipidus (DI), hypopituitarism, or bilateral temporal hemianopsia, whereas lesions of the pineal region produce signs of increased intracranial pressure (ICP) due to obstructive hydrocephalus, Parinaud＊s syndrome, ataxia, behavioral changes, and seizure. The time of diagnosis is related to the presenting symptoms: signs of increased ICP are associated to earlier diagnosis, while endocrine dysfunction or behavioral alteration is associated with delayed diagnosis [6]. Despite specific CT and MRI features for each GCT, histologic types have been described in literature [7, 8], and these tumors are associated with increased markers such as alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG), and placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), a definitive histologic diagnosis is necessary to plan proper treatment [9每11]. Mature teratomas are treated with surgical resection, while other GCT needs a combination of surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy according to the tumor type [12, 13]. Germinoma and mature teratomas have the best prognosis.
A 20-year-old male was admitted to our department in January 2017 with a four-day history of headache and drowsiness. The computed tomographic (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated acute obstructive hydrocephalus due to a mass in the pineal region (maximum diameter of 1.5?cm) with signs of previous hemorrhage and without significative contrast enhancement (Figure 1). An external ventricular drain (EVD) was positioned with neurological improvement.
The serum and CSF levels of beta-hCG were 215?IU/L and 447?IU/L, respectively; the serum and CSF levels of AFP were within normal range. The full-body CT scans, spine MRI, and testicular ultrasounds were negative. Tumors of the pineal region may vary from benign to malignant lesions and are classified into four categories: GCT, pineal cell tumors (such as pineocytoma, pinealoblastoma), glial cell tumors, and miscellanea tumors [14, 15]. In this patient, the lesion site, his age, and tumor marker levels strongly suggested a GCT. Given the high level of beta-hCG and normal level of AFP, a germinoma, choriocarcinoma, or mixed type tumor was taken into account. The patient underwent endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) with biopsy of the anterior part of the lesion which appeared as a purplish and friable mass in the posterior part of the third ventricle; a good hemostasis was obtained without evidence of intraventricular and/or mass hemorrhage. EVD was left in place. The histological exam of the surgical specimen documented neural tissue with ependymal cells, macrophages, and cells of germ line without neoplastic elements. The CT scan four days after surgery demonstrated no signs of hemorrhage. On the fifth day after surgery, EVD was closed but 24 hours later, the patient showed neurological worsening with drowsiness and cognitive function decline; thus, EVD was reopened (Figure 2).
Because of the onset of bacterial meningitis (Staphylococcus haemolyticus isolated from CSF specimen), EVD was substituted and clinical picture improved with antibiotic therapy after ten days. MRI on the twelfth day after surgery demonstrated intratumoral hemorrhage with significative mass expansion, with blood in the third ventricle, and with mesencephalic aqueduct (Figure 3). The ventricoloperitoneal (VP) shunt was positioned one month later after complete infection recovery. The patient underwent four cycles of bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin (BEP) regimen, and the MRI at four months from surgery (Figure 4) showed reduction of mass volume and normal size of brain ventricles. After four cycles of chemotherapy, beta-hCG serum level decreased, but complete normalization was not obtained (serum level was 26?vIU/L). The neurologic status after treatment of hydrocephalus and first-line chemotherapy was good and patient underwent stereotactic radiosurgery for the residual mass. Although in nongerminomatous GCTs the whole brain radiotherapy would be indicated, the patient, also for the absence of histologic diagnosis, refused a whole irradiation due to its high morbidity compared to the stereotactic radiosurgery. Anyway, two months later, he started to complain general malaise and gait imbalance, and the full-body CT scan showed increased intracerebral tumor mass with a new focal lesion and systemic metastasis involving the lungs, liver, and adrenal gland (Figures 5 and 6); the serum levels of beta-hCG were 12.713?UI/L. A liver biopsy was obtained, but no malignant cells were found.
Taking into account the range of tumors which may occur in the pineal region, histologic diagnosis is necessary to get a correct management. Specimens for diagnosis can be obtained by an open procedure, a stereotactic biopsy or an endoscopic approach [14, 16]. Open procedure is generally avoided because many lesions of the pineal region show high response rates to radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy, so aggressive surgical removal is debated. Despite data from literature confirming that stereotactic biopsy is a safe and effective procedure, endoscopic biopsy (Figure 7) is preferred because it allows both biopsy with direct visualization of the tumor and treatment of obstructive hydrocephalus by third ventriculostomy [17每20]. Moreover, most tumors are mixed type ones and the direct visualization of the lesion allows a multiple sampling that increases the probability of a correct histological diagnosis. It has been suggested that endoscopic biopsy should be reserved only for cases of GCTs with normal serum markers because, in case of marker increase, the histologic exam taken in isolation may lead to incorrect diagnosis of benign lesion if the malignant cells are not present in the specimen [21]. We agree with many authors, and we believe that both markers and histologic diagnosis should be carefully valued to identify the type of tumor even in patients with elevated tumor markers [22]. In patients with increase hCG serum level, some authors prefer to start with chemotherapy without biopsy because of the high diagnostic specificity for choriocarcinoma [23每28]; anyway, the initial serum level of hCG in our case (215?UI/L) was significantly lower than the values reported in literature, so the biopsy was mandatory. It is well known that cerebral GCS has a high probability of hemorrhage during stereotactic, minimally invasive, and endoscopic procedures [29每32]. In our case, we observed hemorrhage between the fifth and the twelfth day after surgery, and so we confirm the high risk of intraventricular hemorrhage of this lesion. We also supposed that the bleeding into the ventricles was the cause of ventriculostomy failure. In this case, the position of the VP shunt is safe even in case of previous CSF infection [33]. This is described also for other internal devices such as spinal and orthopedics prothesis before proper antibiotic therapy [34每36]. Nongerminomatous primary intracranial GCTs are high aggressive tumor with a 3-year survival rate ranging from 27.3% for pure malignant tumor to 70% for mixed type with some elements of pure malignant tumor and both cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood dissemination may occur; metastasis through a VP shunt has also been described [37]. In this case, we supposed a blood dissemination of tumor because of the absence of spinal metastasis, which are related to CSF way, and/or intraperitoneal lesions. Finally, because nongerminomatous GCT has poor prognosis compared with germinoma, whole brain irradiation is required to prevent the relapse either locally or metastatic disease in particular CSF spread. The whole brain radiotherapy treatment has been proposed but patient refused it.
In cases of pineal region tumor, ETV and biopsy are valid options as primary surgical approach, but, because of the hemorrhage high risk, third ventriculostomy failure may occur, so a careful clinical follow-up is necessary for the prompt positioning of a ventricularperitoneal shunt.
Unusual Presentation of Prostate Cancer Metastatic to the Cricoid Cartilage and Oral Cavity
In Mexico, prostate cancer is the second leading cause of death in men. Prostate cancer usually presents metastasis to the regional lymph nodes and bone. Hereby, we present an unusual case of metastatic prostate cancer, with affectation to the cricoid cartilage and oral cavity, being the first case to have ever been reported in Mexico. A 68-year-old Mexican man was diagnosed with prostate cancer and cribriform architecture histology with low serum level of prostate-specific antigen, debuting with laryngeal stridor. The biopsy came back positive for metastatic prostate carcinoma. During treatment with radiotherapy, metastasis developed to the oral cavity.
Worldwide, prostate cancer is the second leading cause of death in men, with a peak incidence between 60 and 70 years of age. In Mexico, it is the second most frequent neoplasm and the second cause of death in men [1, 2]. Most patients with metastatic prostate cancer have high levels of prostate-specific antigen; there is, however, a subgroup (1%) of the population, which have either low or undetectable levels, so the use of androgen blockade is ineffective. Consequently, the prognosis of patients is quite poor [3]. Prostate cancer metastases often occur at sites such as the skeletal bone, lung, liver, pleura, and adrenal glands. In the literature, there are 14 published cases of metastasis to the larynx due to prostate cancer, which is a rare event in the clinical practice [4]. Metastases to the oral cavity are uncommon.
A 68-year-old Mexican male with diabetes mellitus type 2 and systemic arterial hypertension was diagnosed in 2013 with prostate cancer by transurethral resection of the prostate which reported ductal adenocarcinoma not differentiated (Gleason score 9 (4?+?5)) and a prostate-specific antigen of 0.446?ng/dl. Initial treatment consisted of bilateral orchiectomy.
The same year, he attended our radiotherapy department, where further studies were performed: a computed tomography scan (CT scan) showed no tumor activity data and bone scintigraphy did not show any alterations with an increase to the tracer and cystoscopy which gave no indication of bladder infiltration. A clinical stage of high risk was declared for the patient.
Radical radiotherapy with a dose of 75?Gy in 42 sessions was recommended, with his treatment ending in July 2014. During the patient＊s surveillance, nadir of the prostate-specific antigen of 0.053?ng/dl was corroborated.
In September 2016, the patient presented symptoms of dysphonia and laryngeal stridor. A CT scan was performed which shows decreased tracheal lumen and thickening of the thyroid and cricoid cartilages (Figure 1).
A fibrolaryngoscopy revealed findings of extrinsic compression of the trachea from the membranous portion. An emergency tracheostomy was performed due to impending asphyxia, during which biopsies were taken. Metastatic carcinoma with the ductal cribriform pattern was corroborated (Figure 2). A new bone scintigraphy was requested, reporting disseminated disease positive in axial and appendicular to the larynx.
For the previous reason, palliative radiotherapy was decided as treatment to the larynx, during which the patient presented a nodule in the oral cavity in the upper right gingival area with a hard palate extension (Figure 3). The biopsy reported a carcinoma with cribriform xanthomatous phenotype (Figure 4). The patient is currently receiving chemotherapy treatment based on docetaxel.
Laryngeal metastasis is a rare entity, since the most frequent metastases to this organ are melanoma and renal carcinoma. The most affected anatomic site of the laryngeal is the supraglottis, whereas the glottis is the least common. The dissemination pathways might be hematogenous or lymphatic [5]. There have been 14 published cases since 1908 of this type of metastasis [4]. Laryngeal metastases usually develop unnoticed and may or may not present clinical symptoms, such as hoarseness, stridor, or develop infiltration into the supraglottic space with decrease in the tracheal lumen. The diagnosis is made by a CT scan, which plays an important role in the identification of the lesion and its extension. A nasolaryngoscopy biopsy is used to determine the primary origin [1, 5].
Metastases in the oral region are infrequent with only 1 to 1.5% prevalence, and there have been anecdotal findings reported in the literature, most frequently in the jaw and maxillary and in less proportion in the gingiva [4, 5, 7].
The case presented confirms what has been previously stated by the literature: it is a nonfavorable histology, a non-antigen-raising, and a non-symptom presenting during his surveillance. The use of the positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) during the surveillance of patients with the same mentioned characteristics is of high importance for the early detection of metastases. Castration either surgical or biochemical may not have favorable results due to the aggressive behavior of the histology [8].
A case of metastatic carcinoma in the cricoid cartilage and oral cavity is reported, which can be considered as case number 15 in the clinical literature and the first reported case in Mexico. The present case aims to enrich the literature on metastatic cancer to infrequent sites in non-antigen-enhancer prostate cancer.
Cisplatin is commonly used in the treatment of lung, testicular, ovarian, head and neck, and urothelial cancers, among others. Despite recent excitement surrounding novel targeted therapies, cisplatin remains a critical and commonly used tool in the oncologic armamentarium and is critical for the treatment of unresectable and metastatic cancers.1 One major limitation to wider use of cisplatin is renal toxicity, which occurs in 28每36% of patients who receive even a single dose.2 In a small number of patients, renal injury is irreversible, necessitating hemodialysis.3 Nephrotoxicity can result in hospitalization, complicate surgical procedures, impair diagnostic testing, and can delay or limit the spectrum.
Hypertensive Brainstem Encephalopathy Mimicking Peritumoral Edema after Gamma Knife Radiosurgery for Cerebellopontine Angle Meningioma: A Case Report
An 83-year-old man presented with hypertensive brainstem encephalopathy manifesting as general weakness, dysarthria, gait disturbance, urinary incontinence, and decreased cognitive function. The patient had a history of gamma knife radiosurgery (GKR) for cerebellopontine angle (CPA) meningioma 10 years prior. Compared with previous magnetic resonance (MR) imaging results, a recent MR image revealed massive brainstem hyperintensity in T2-weighted images, not in the parieto-occipital lobes. The lesions were nearly completely resolved several days after normalization of the blood pressure. Isolated hypertensive brainstem encephalopathy without concomitant typical parieto-occipital abnormalities are unusual and the diagnosis is challenging especially after gamma knife radiosurgery for cerebellopontine angle meningioma. We describe a patient with hypertensive brainstem encephalopathy that was initially confused with peritumoral edema.
Hypertensive encephalopathy (HE) is an acute neurological disorder caused by a sudden increase in systemic blood pressure [1,2]. HE is characterized by headache, mental deterioration, visual disturbance, and seizures. Imaging abnormalities are predominant in the parietooccipital subcortical white matter, and the clinical and neuroradiological abnormalities are reversible after blood pressure normalization. Therefore, the term ※posterior reversible leukoencephalopathy§ has been used to describe this condition [3-5]. According to a previous studies [6], the brainstem is involved in 58% of HE cases, but isolated brainstem involvement in HE has rarely been reported [7-9]. We describe a patient with hypertensive brainstem encephalopathy that could be confused with peritumoral edema (PTE) after gamma knife radiosurgery (GKR) for cerebellopontine angle (CPA) meningioma.
An 83-year-old man presented at the neurosurgery clinic with general weakness, dysarthria, gait disturbance, and mildly decreased cognitive function that lasted for 1 month. The patient had a history of GKR 10 years prior, for right CPA meningioma. The CT scan indicated diffuse decreased attenuation of the pons with extension into the midbrain and also revealed a minimal pontine hemorrhage (Figure 1). Using T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, a massive hyperintensity was identified in the same location identified in the CT scan. Results of the diffusion weighted image (DWI) were normal, indicating the absence of acute infarction, and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps showed slightly increased diffusion in the brainstem, consistent with vasogenic edema (Figure 2). At the time of the presenting visit, the patient＊s blood pressure was systolic blood pressure more than 200 mmHg. Serum laboratory findings were within normal limits, however, renal function parameters suggested decreased renal function. Additional tests were performed at the cardiology and nephrology outpatient departments, in order to determine the cause of hypertensive crisis. Cardiologic evaluations were within normal age-related limits. Kidney ultrasonography and doppler ultrasonography did not indicate renal artery stenosis, but a small left kidney with cortical thinning was observed. These findings demonstrate that this patient had a history of chronic renal insufficiency, and that renal function was recently aggravated. The patient was taking antihypertensive drug to control his blood pressure, and was prescribed oral steroid, due to brainstem swelling. After a month of treatment, systolic blood pressure fluctuated between 90 and 130 mmHg. General weakness, dysarthria, gait disturbance, urinary incontinence, and cognitive dysfunction improved, but right-hand grip weakness remained, presumably due to the pontine hemorrhage. A follow-up CT scan 1 month later showed improvement of the low attenuation in the brainstem and periventricular areas, and resolution of the pontine hemorrhage (Figure 1). This study was approved by the Dongguk University Gyeongju Hospital Institutional Review Board.
The clinical findings of this patient were initially suggestive of delayed PTE following GKR on right CPA meningioma 10 years earlier. However, post-GKR PTE is known to occur more frequently in 1每23 months following the procedure, with a peak time to edema of 6-8 months [6-10]. Additionally, our patient had a history of a severe hypertensive event, systolic blood pressure more than 200 mmHg, and subsequent improvement after normalization of blood pressure. These finding were strongly suggestive of HE, rather than PTE.
HE is an acute neurological syndrome caused by a sudden increase of systemic blood pressure and is most commonly a secondary event, triggered by paroxysmal hypertension with various etiologies including renal disease, collagen vascular disorders, eclampsia, use of immunosuppressive and cytotoxic drugs, and hematologic disorders [11]. The most widely accepted pathophysiologic mechanism of HE is vasogenic edema that acute and subacute elevation of blood pressure exceeds the upper limit of cerebral vascular autoregulation, causing forced dilation with hyperperfusion of small-caliber arteries, dysfunction of the endothelium, and leakage of fluid and protein into the extracellular space [4,11-13]. The vessels in posterior circulation are more sparsely innervated by sympathetic nerves than are those in the anterior circulation; therefore, they are poorly responsive to initiate protective vasoconstriction in response to an acute increase in arterial blood pressure and are susceptible to the breakdown of autoregulation. Additionally, HE is known to involve the cortex or subcortical white matter of the parietal or occipital lobes rather than the brainstem because the brainstem autoregulations more effectively [14,15]. The upper limit of cerebral autoregulation in deep brain structures such as the thalamus, basal ganglia, or brainstem is higher than that in the cerebral cortex in normotensive and spontaneously hypertensive rat models [16]. The deep brain structures are supplied by direct branches from the middle or posterior cerebral artery or basilar artery, while the cortex and subcortex are supplied by the terminal pial arteries. Therefore, it is likely that severe acceleration of hypertension is required for hypertensive brainstem encephalopathy.
MR image scan is the gold standard of diagnosis and must be performed as soon as possible to rule out HE. MR imaging of hypertensive brainstem encephalopathy typically shows increased T2-weighted and FLAIR signal intensities in the brainstem and cerebellum, without restricted diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging. These findings indicate vasogenic edema rather than cytotoxic edema such as brainstem infarction [17].
Slotty et al. performed a CT-based cerebral perfusion measurement in patients with chronic subdural hematoma and reported significantly up-regulated cerebral blood volume (CBV) and cerebral blood flow (CBF) in chronically compressed cortical area with the mean transit time (MTT) as the set point parameter of cerebral perfusion clearly elevated above normal values. Therefore, the brain appears to maintain normal or approximately normal cerebral perfusion despite increased local pressure [18]. These findings are applicable to our patient. The observation of chronic brainstem compression by CPA meningioma in this patient with HE suggests that up-regulated CBV and CBF of the compressed brainstem could increase its vulnerability to edema caused by paroxysmal hypertension. However, previous reports do not describe this relationship in detail and further experimental studies in animal models of HE is necessary to investigate our hypothesis.
The clinical findings of this patient were initially suggestive of delayed PTE following GKR on right CPA meningioma 10 years earlier. However, post-GKR PTE is known to occur more frequently in 1每23 months following the procedure, with a peak time to edema of 6-8 months [6-10]. Additionally, our patient had a history of a severe hypertensive event, systolic blood pressure more than 200 mmHg, and subsequent improvement after normalization of blood pressure. These finding were strongly suggestive of HE, rather than PTE.
We presented the case of hypertensive brainstem encephalopathy that could be mimicked PTE after GKR for CPA meningioma. Clinicians should be aware of the clinical course of PTE or aggravation after GKR for meningioma, and at the same time, consider the possibility of hypertensive encephalopathy.
Successful Expectant Management of Cotwin Death in Septate Uterus: Case Report
Congenital uterine anomalies are malformations of uterus that develop due to disturbances in development, formation or fusion of Mullerian ducts during embryonic life [1-3]. The incidence of M邦llerian duct anomalies in women is about 1% to 3% [2]. Septate uterus is one of the most common types of congenital uterine anomalies [2,3]. It is a kind of uterine malformations where there is a septum from the fundus forming two compartments. It can be categorized into complete septate groups in which case the septum extends from fundus to the cervical of forming separate uterine cavity, no matter equal or unequal, or subseptate groups where the septum projects minimally from the uterine fundus [4]. It is associated with poor reproductive outcomes including recurrent spontaneous abortion, stillbirth and preterm birth resulting in fetal survival rate of 6% to 28% and a high rate of spontaneous abortion as high as 60% [5,6].
There are few reported cases of twin pregnancy in septate uterus [7]. Twin pregnancy, even in normal uterus, is related with a number of fetal and maternal complications. Cotwin death is one of fetal complications the incidence of which can be as low as 0.5% and as high as 21.5% [8,9].
A 25-year-old primigravid mother at gestational age of 33 weeks + 4 days from reliable last normal menstrual period visited Gimbie Adventist Hospital for further evaluation as she was diagnosed to carry twin fetuses with 3rd trimester ultrasound at private clinic in the town. She denies family history of twin pregnancy. She does not have any major complaints other than minor pregnancy related symptoms. She was having regular monthly menstrual flow and there were no complaints prior to the index pregnancy. She has neither 1st trimester ultrasound examination nor other imaginings like hysteroscopy or hysterosalpingography prior to pregnancy.
On examination, her vital signs were within the normal ranges. Abdominal exam showed term sized gravid uterus, palpable multiple fetal poles and fetal heart beat (FHB) was detected only on the lower left side of the uterus which was 140 beats per minute. There was no other pertinent finding in other systems.
Her obstetrics ultrasound examination showed twin intrauterine pregnancy with two separate placentas and thick membrane like structure running from the fundus to the cervix. Twin A (left side fetus) was in Cephalic presentation with reassuring biophysical profile and aggregate gestational age of 33 weeks+6 days. Twin B (right side fetus) was in breech presentation, negative FHB and aggregate gestational age of 32 weeks+5 days. No gross fetal anomaly was seen in both twins.
With the impression of third trimester twin pregnancy with cotwin death and to rule out septate uterus, she was admitted to ward and four doses of dexamethasone 6 mg intramuscularly 12 hours apart were administered to facilitate fetal lung maturity. Based on client request, it was decided to have outpatient follow up with biophysical profile twice in a week and Complete blood count on weekly basis up to 37 completed weeks.
At 37 weeks of Gestational age, elective lower uterine segment cesarean section was done with the finding of twin pregnancy in different compartment of septate uterus (Figure 1). There were two separate placentas in each compartment (Figure 2). The right compartment was containing grade-III macerated dead female fetus weighing 2000 gms. The left compartment was carrying alive male fetus weighing 3000 gm with Appearance, Pulse, Grimace, Activity and Respiration (APGAR) score of 7 and 9. The uterine septum was thick and extending from fundus to isthmic part of the uterus (Figure 1) and it was left untouched. None of the placentae were attached to the septum. Uterine incision was closed in two layers. After hemostasis secured and correct count of materials reported, abdomen closed in layers. The mother and her newborn were discharged on 4th post-operative day with good condition after she was informed about the uterine finding and its possible obstetric and/or gynecologic effects in the future pregnancy (ies).
Septate uterus is one of the most common types of congenital uterine anomalies [2,3] and its septum is categorized as partial or complete as in this case. It is associated with poor reproductive outcome [3]. Like in normal uterus, twin pregnancy can also occur in both compartments of septate uterus [7]. This could be explained by the possible occurrence of fertilization in both uterine tubes with subsequent implantation in respective cavity or fertilization in one of the tubes followed by division of zygote into two. Implantation in the contralateral cavity is possible when there are tiny channels in the septum [7].
Diagnosis of uterine malformations is usually made by threedimensional ultrasound, hysterosalpingography and/or magnetic resonance imaging when patients present with poor reproductive outcome [3,8]. In our patient the diagnosis was considered with the help of obstetrics ultrasound and confirmed at cesarean section which was done for cotwin death at term after she was on conservative management.
This patient carried one of the fetuses to term which could be explained by the fact that implantation was to the endometrium; not to the septum which could have made growth of the fetus very difficult. But death of the other twin is so striking with regard to its cause and management. This complication, in patients with normal uterus, usually common in monochorionic twins where there is abnormal vascular communication between twin fetuses [8]. But cotwin death in this case possibly resulted either from inadequate space imposed by the alive fetus in the other compartment or due to local problem in that fetus.
Expectant management of death of one of the fetuses is usually controversial as it could theoretically trigger coagulation defects in the mother and/or affect alive fetus from some vascular communication between the fetuses [8]. But in septate uterus, particularly in complete one, conservative management of cotwin death is possible as fetuses are in different compartments if there is no maternal condition necessitating immediate delivery as we did in our case.
A bilateral caesarean section is the norm when there is a uterine septum extending to the lower segment and an obstetrician should attend this operative delivery because unexpected complications may arise [10]. But in our patient single uterine incision was made as it was not technically possible. In this case, the septum was left unintervend due to the fact that it is not always associated with poor obstetric performance as in our patient. However, when a septate uterus is associated with adverse reproductive outcome, surgical intervention should be considered [5,11].
